(14th century BC) What Egyptian pharaoh of the eighteenth dynasty and husband of Nefertiti came to the throne as Amenhotep IV, introduced the monotheistic solar cult of Aten, and moved the capital from Thebes to the newly-built Akhetaten?
Akhenaten

(23 February--6 March 1836) What pivotal event of the Texas Revolution took place in San Antonio and involved all but three defenders dying?
Battle of the Alamo

(40--93) What Roman general and British governor completed the subjugation of Wales and defeated the Scottish Highland tribes?
Gnaeus Julius Agricola

(63--12 BC) What advisor of Augustus and Roman general played an important part in the naval victories over Mark Antony?
Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa

(356--323 BC) What king of Macedon and son of Philip II conquered Persia, Egypt, Syria, Mesopotamia, Bactria, and the Punjab?
Alexander the Great

(1404--72) What Italian architect, humanist, painter, and art critic wrote Della pittura: the first account of the theory of perspective in the Renaissance?
Leon Battista Alberti

(1450--1515) What Italian scholar, printer, and publisher printed fine first editions of many Greek and Latin classics?
Aldus Manutius/Teobaldo Manucci

(1451--1512) What Italian merchant and explorer whose Latin name likely gave rise to America's name travelled to the New World, reaching the coast of Venezuela on his first voyage and exploring the coast of Brazil?
Amerigo Vespucci

(1453--1515) What Portuguese colonial statesman conquered Goa (1510) and made it the Portuguese empire's capital in the east?
Alfonso de Albuquerque

(1471--1528) What German engraver and painter was the leading German artist of the Renaissance, noted for his technically advanced woodcuts and copper engravings and his watercolours and drawings?
Albrecht Dürer

(1503--72) What Italian mannerist painter spent most of his career in Florence as court painter to Cosimo de' Medici and is best-known for Venus, Cupid, Folly, and time (c. 1546)?
Agnolo Bronzino

(1542--1605) What Mughal emperor of India (1556--1605) expanded his empire to incorporate northern India and established an efficient and enlightened administration?
Jalaluddin Muhammad Akbar (Akbar the Great)

(1582--1652) What Italian priest and composer, noted for his Miserere, a setting of Psalm 51 (Vulgate Psalm 50), written for performance in the Sistine Chapel, was appointed to the Sistine Chapel Choir by Pope Urban VIII?
Gregorio Allegri

(1610--85) What Dutch painter and engraver chiefly depicted lively genre scenes of peasants carousing or brawling in crowded taverns or barns?
Adriaen van Ostade

(1668--1747) What French novelist and playwright is best known for the picaresque novel Gil Blas (1715--35)?
Alain-René Lesage

(1671--1751) The Adagio in G with which this composer is popularly associated was reportedly composed by musicologist Remo Giazotto who catalogued his works. What Italian Baroque composer noted for his oboe concerti wrote themes that inspired at least two Bach fugues?
Tomaso Albinoni

(1676--1721) This sailor quarrelled with his captain on a privateering expedition and was put ashore, at his request, on one of the uninhabited Juan Fernandez Islands, where he remained until 1709. What Scottish sailor's experiences form the basis of the Daniel Defoe novel Robinson Crusoe (1719)?
Alexander Selkirk/Selcraig

(1688--1744) This figure of the Augustan age is famous for his caustic wit, metrical skill, and use of the heroic couplet. What English poet wrote The rape of the lock (1712) and An essay on man (1733--34)?
Alexander Pope

(1708--77) What Swiss anatomist and physiologist pioneered the study of neurology and experimental physiology and wrote the first textbook of physiology?
Albrecht von Haller

(1718--99) What Italian mathematician and philosopher, regarded as the first female mathematician of the Western world, wrote a comprehensive treatment on analysis and algebra?
Maria Gaetana Agnesi

(1785--1873) What Italian novelist, playwright, and poet is remembered chiefly as the author of I promessi sposi `The betrothed' (1825--42): a historical reconstruction of seventeenth-century Lombardy?
Alessandro Manzoni

(1790--1869) What French poet, statesman, and historian was Minister of Foreign Affairs following the Revolution of 1848 and wrote Méditations poétiques?
Alphonse de Lamartine

(1799--1837) What Russian poet, novelist and playwright wrote prolifically in many genres, penning the romantic narrative poem ``Ruslan and Ludmilla,'' the verse novel Eugene Onegin, and the blank verse historical drama Boris Godunov?
Aleksandr Pushkin

(1801--92) What English astronomer and geophysicist conceptualized isostasy and gave an improved estimate of the earth's density?
Sir George Biddell Airy

(1823--1913) What English naturalist and founder of zoogeography independently formulated a theory of the origin of species similar to Charles Darwin's?
Alfred Russel Wallace

(1824--95) What son of an esteemed French novelist, known as fils `son,' wrote the novel/play La dame aux camélias (1848), which inspired Verdi's La traviata?
Alexandre Dumas fils

(1829--1907) What Scottish meteorologist wrote a textbook on meteorology and produced maps and tables of atmospheric circulation, ocean currents, and temperatures based mainly on information gathered on the voyage of HMS Challenger from 1872 to 1876?
Alexander Buchan

(1833--87) What Russian composer is best known for his opera Prince Igor that was completed posthumously by Rimsky-Korsakov and Glazunov?
Aleksandr Borodin

(1833--91) What Spanish novelist and short story writer is noted for The three-cornered hat?
Pedro Antonio de Alarcón

(1837--1909) What English poet and critic associated with the Pre-Raphaelites also contributed to the revival of interest in Elizabethan and Jacobean drama and produced influential studies of William Blake and the Brontës?
Algernon Charles Swinburne

(1857--1911) What French psychologist devised a mental age scale that described performance in relation to the average performance of students of the same physical age, and with the psychiatrist Théodore Simon pioneered a system of intelligence tests?
Alfred Binet

(1860--1939) What Czech painter and designer was a leading figure in the art nouveau movement, noted for his flowing poster designs typically featuring Sarah Bernhardt and for The Slav epic?
Alphonse Mucha

(1861--1947) What English philosopher and mathematician collaborated with his pupil Bertrand Russell on Principia Mathematica?
Alfred North Whitehead

(1865--1936) What Russian composer and student of Rimsky-Korsakov wrote the ballet The seasons (1901)?
Aleksandr Glazunov

(1866--1919) What French-born Swiss chemist showed that stereochemistry was general to the whole of chemistry, was a pioneer in the study of coordination compounds, and won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1913?
Alfred Werner

(1872--1915) This composer wrote symphonies, tone poems, and numerous pieces for piano, including sonatas and preludes. What Russian composer and pianist, whose late works reflected his interest in mysticism and theosophy, wrote The divine poem (his Third Symphony) and Prometheus: The poem of fire?
Aleksandr Scriabin

(1873--1944) What French surgeon and biologist developed refined techniques for suturing arteries and veins, carried out some of the first organ transplants, and won the 1912 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine?
Alexis Carrel

(1875--1965) What German theologian, musician, and medical missionary established a hospital in Gabon and won the Nobel Peace Prize (1952)?
Albert Schweitzer

(1876--1959) This organic chemist worked on the chemistry and structure of steroids and their derivatives, notably cholesterol. What Nobel laureate (1928) investigated D vitamins and vitamin B1 and discovered histamine?
Adolf Windaus

(1880--1930) What German meteorologist and geophysicist was the first proponent of the theory of continental drift?
Alfred Lothar Wegener

(1881--1955) What Scottish bacteriologist discovered the effect of penicillin on bacteria and won the 1945 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine with Florey and Chain, who established its therapeutic use as an antibiotic?
Sir Alexander Fleming

(1885--1935) What Austrian composer of the Second Viennese School was a leading exponent of twelve-tone composition and composed Wozzeck, Lulu, and a violin concerto?
Alban Berg

(1886--1914) What French novelist and literary columnist completed only one novel, Le grand meaulnes (1913), before dying in World War I?
Alain-Fournier

(1887--1964) What Russian-born American sculptor adapted cubist techniques to sculpture and sculpted Walking woman (1912)?
Alexander Archipenko

(1888--1976) This German-born American taught at the Bauhaus until 1933 and was influenced by constructivism. What head of Yale University's department of design disseminated Bauhaus principles through his teaching work in the US and is best known for his series of abstract canvases Homage to the square?
Josef Albers

(1889--1983) This conductor was noted for his championship of English composers. What Englishman was the music director of the BBC (1930--49) and principal conductor of the London Philharmonic Orchestra (1950--57)?
Sir Adrian Boult

(1889--1996) What Russian member of the Acmeist group of poets wrote the poem cycle Requiem about Stalinist terror?
Anna Akhmatova (Anna Andreevna Gorenko)

(1890--1976) What English writer of detective fiction wrote Murder on the Orient Express, Death on the Nile, and The mousetrap?
Agatha Christie

(1898--1976) What Finnish architect and designer often used brick, copper, and timber in his designs and invented bent plywood furniture?
Alvar Aalto

(1899--1947) What American gangster dominated organized crime in Chicago in the 1920s and was indirectly responsible for many murders, including the St. Valentine's Day Massacre?
Al Capone

(1899--1980) What English film director is acclaimed for The thirty-nine steps, Strangers on a train, Psycho, and The birds?
Sir Alfred Hitchcock

(1901--66) What Swiss sculptor and painter is known for works of emaciated and elongated human forms, like L'homme au doigt `Pointing man' (1947)?
Alberto Giacometti

(1903--69) This German argued that philosophical authoritarianism is inevitably oppressive. What philosopher, sociologist, and musicologist was a member of the Frankfurt School?
Theodor W. Adorno

(1903--88) What South African writer and politician is best known for his novel Cry, the beloved country (1948), a passionate indictment of the apartheid system?
Alan Paton

(1905--81) What German architect and Nazi government official (Minister for Armaments and Munitions) designed the Nuremberg stadium for the 1934 Nazi Party congress and served twenty years in Spandau prison after the Nuremberg trials?
Albert Speer

(1906--88) What Turkish-born British car designer designed the Morris Minor and the Mini?
Sir Alec Issigonis

(1908--73) What Chilean statesman was the first avowed Marxist to win a presidency in a free election and overthrown and killed in a military coup led by Pinochet?
Salvador Allende

(1908--95) What Swedish theoretical physicist made strides in controlled thermonuclear fusion and won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1970?
Hannes Alfvén

(1909--79) What American cartoonist is best known for his comic strip Li'l Abner, which appeared in the New York Mirror from 1934 to 1977?
Al Capp

(1909--81) What American novelist drew on his childhood experiences in the slums of Chicago for his novels of social realism, like The man with the golden arm and Walk on the wild side?
Nelson Algren

(1910--98) What Japanese film director is noted for Rashomon and Ran---a Japanese version of King Lear?
Akira Kurosawa

(1910--2004) What English ballet dancer founded Markova--Dolin Ballet with Anton Dolin in 1935 and was prima ballerina with the London Festival Ballet (1950--52)?
Dame Alicia Markova

(1913--60) What French novelist, playwright, and essayist closely aligned with existentialism won the Nobel Prize for Literature (1957) and wrote The outsider, The plague, and The rebel?
Albert Camus

(1914--98) What English physiologist demonstrated the role of sodium and potassium ions in the transmission of nerve impulses between cells with Andrew Huxley and won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1963)?
Sir Alan Lloyd Hodgkin

(1918--2008) This Russian spent eight years in a labour camp for criticizing Stalin and began writing on his release. His books were banned from the Soviet Union in 1963, and he was exiled from there in 1974. What 1970 Nobel Prize for Literature recipient notably wrote One day in the life of Ivan Denisovich (1962), The Gulag archipelago (1973), and Cancer ward?
Alexander Solzhenitsyn

(1918--2012) What Algerian statesman (prime minister 1962--63, president 1963--65) was the first president of an independent Algeria and overthrown in a military coup?
Ahmed Ben Bella

(1921--92) What statesman, First Secretary of the Czechoslovak Communist Party (1968--69), was the driving force behind the political reforms of 1968, prompting the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 and his removal from office?
Alexander Dubček

(1922--87) What Scottish novelist wrote thrillers like The guns of Navarone and Where eagles dare and published two other novels under the pseudonym ``Ian Stuart''?
Alistair Maclean

(1922--2014) What French film director of la nouvelle vague used experimental techniques to explore memory and time and is noted for Hiroshima mon amour and L'année dernière à Marienbad?
Alain Resnais

(1925--2003) What Ugandan soldier and head of state (1971--79) overthrew President Obote in a coup and was deposed after a period of rule characterized by the murder of political opponents?
Idi Ami Dada

(1927--2003) What American tennis player was the first black to succeed at the highest level of tennis, winning all of the major world women's singles titles in the late 1950s?
Althea Gibson

(1927--2007) What New Zealand chemist discovered and developed conductive polymers, for which he won the 2000 Nobel Prize for Chemistry with Heeger and Shirakawa?
Alan G. MacDiarmid

(1934--2017) What Iranian statesman and religious leader (president 1989--97) helped organize the mass demonstrations that led to the shah's overthrow and sought to improve the country's relations with the West as president?
Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani

(b. 1933) What Japanese emperor since 1989 was the son of Hirohito?
Akihito

(b. 1940) What American film actor achieved recognition for The godfather and received eight Oscar nominations, winning one for Scent of a woman?
Al Pacino

(b. 1942) What Italian racing motorcyclist won a record 15 world titles between 1966 and 1975 and won the Isle of Man TT ten times?
Giacomo Agostini

(b. 1970) What American tennis player won one Wimbledon, two US Open, one French Open, and four Australian Open championships?
André Agassi

(c. 50--19 BC) What Roman poet is known for his elegiac love poetry and his celebration of peaceful rural life?
Albius Tibullus

(c. 339--97, feast day: 7 December) What Doctor of the Church and bishop of Milan was a champion of orthodoxy and encouraged developments in church music?
St. Ambrose

(c. 450--404 BC) What Athenian general and statesman led the unsuccessful Athenian expeditions against Sparta and Sicily during the Peloponnesian War but fled to Sparta after being charged with sacrilege?
Alcibiades

(c. 735--804) What English scholar, theologian, and advisor to Charlemagne is credited with transforming Charlemagne's court into a cultural centre in the period known as the Carolingian Renaissance?
Alcuin/Albinus

(c. 1100--59) Who was the only English pope?
Adrian IV

(c. 1200--80, feast day: 15 November) What Dominican theologian, philosopher, and scientist known as ``Doctor universalis'' taught St. Thomas Aquinas and contributed significantly to the comparison of Christian theology and pagan philosophy?
St. Albertus Magnus

(c. 1211--82) What patron saint of Bohemia was canonized in 1989 and has her feast day on 2 March?
St. Agnes

(c. 1485--1538) What German painter and engraver was one of the first modern European landscape painters and principal artist of the Danube School?
Albrecht Altdorfer

(c. 1605--38) What Flemish painter's most typical works represent peasant scenes in taverns?
Adriaen Brouwer

(d. 651) What Irish missionary founded a church and monastery on the island of Lindisfarne in 635 and became its first bishop?
St. Aidan

(d. c. 304) What Roman martyr with the emblem of a lamb is the patron saint of virgins and has her feast day on 21 January?
St. Agnes

What supreme god is identified with the sun God Ra, and, in Greek and Roman times, Zeus and Jupiter?
Amun

(Greek mythology) This brother of Menelaus was commander-in-chief of the Greek expedition against Troy. What king of Mycenae was murdered by his wife Clytemnestra and her lover Aegisthus but was avenged by his son Orestes and daughter Electra?
Agamemnon

What hero of the Trojan war was the son of Telamon, the king of Salamis, and proverbial for his size and strength?
Ajax

(Greek mythology) What hero was the son of Oileus and king of Locris?
Ajax

What is Alecto?
one of the Erinyes/Furies

(Greek mythology) What son of Thystes loved Agamemnon's wife Clytemnestra?
Aegisthus

(Greek mythology) What wife of Admetus saved her husband's life by consenting to die on his behalf?
Alcestis

(Greek mythology) Who is the god of the winds?
Aeolus

Define ``aliyah.''
immigration to Israel; the honour of being called upon to read from the Torah

What is an afikoman?
piece broken off from a matzo during the Seder and put aside to be eaten at the end of the meal. It is traditionally hidden to be searched for by the children present

What evil spirit is Ahura Mazda's opponent?
Angra Mainyu/Ahriman

A narrative that begins in what way, Latin for ``in the middle of things,'' includes flashbacks to provide exposition, like in Hamlet and the Odyssey?
in medias res

About what was Jesus talking when he spoke of destroying the temple and raising it in three days?
his body (John 2.19--21)

According to Jeremiah's vision, where would the new covenant between God and man be written?
on men's hearts (Jer. 31.33)

According to Paul, who is called to be the temple of God?
all believers (1 Cor. 6.19)

According to the grand unification theory, hypothetically, what particles can decay into pions and positrons over time?
protons

What does an acrophobe fear?
heights

What kind of diseases do adenoviruses cause chiefly?
respiratory diseases

Adrar des Ifoghas is a massif region in the central Sahara on the border between [---] and [---].
Algeria, Mali

On what island is Aesop said to have lived as a slave?
Samos

After Saul's death, where did the Philistines carry his armour?
the temple of Ashtoreth (1 Sam. 31.10)

After what lake, located in Russia and Finland and the largest in Europe, was a methane lake on Titan named?
Lake Ladoga

After what villainous figure in the New Testament was a Richard Strauss opera based on an Oscar Wilde poem named?
Salome

Along with C, Gregorian chant was written using a movable clef indicating what note?
F

Around what planet do moons Oberon and Titania orbit?
Uranus

As of 2018, what city has the biggest port in terms of twenty-foot equivalent units?
Shanghai

At what battle did Constantine defeat Maxentius to become co-emperor in 312?
Battle of the Milvian Bridge

At what battle did José de San Martín defeat Chilean royalists in 1817?
Battle of Chacabuco

At what battle did Simón Bolívar defeat the Spanish in 1819, leading to the independence of New Granada?
Battle of Boyacá

At what battle did the Franks, led by Charles Martel, defeat an Umayyad Caliphate army under Abdul Rahman al-Ghafiqi, halting the Muslim advance into Western Europe in 732?
Battle of Tour-Poitiers

At what battle did the Holy Roman Empire, the Hapsburgs, and the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth unite to defeat the Ottomans in 1683?
Battle of Vienna

At what battle did the Mongols defeat an army of Poles and Moravians in 1241?
Battle of Legnica

At what Ethiopian lake does the Blue Nile begin?
Lake Tana

What class of materials that have zero electrical resistance and that are involved in the creation of magnetic fields due to the Meissner effect does BCS theory explain?
superconductors

Bernstein's Chichester Psalms was written in [---].
Hebrew

Both Aphrodite and Persephone loved this beautiful youth. What Greek mythological figure --- whose name is used to describe a handsome young man --- was killed by a boar and decreed by Zeus to spend each winter with Persephone and summer with Aphrodite?
Adonis

Built by King Charles of Bourbon and inaugurated in 1737, what Napolitano opera house has the world's oldest working theatre and was the location of many Rossini opera premieres?
Teatro di San Carlo

Built from volcanic tuff, what Roman city wall served as an ancient Roman defensive barrier but was superseded by the Aurelian Wall when the city's borders went beyond the wall?
Servian Wall

What does one call Richard Wagner's operas?
music dramas

By what name is Anton Bruckner's Symphony no. 2 better known?
Symphony of Pauses

By what name is Anton Bruckner's Symphony no. 3 better known?
Wagner Symphony

By what name is Anton Bruckner's Symphony no. 4 better known?
Romantic

By what name is Camille Saint-Saëns's Symphony no. 3 better known?
Organ

By what name is Dmitri Shostakovich's Symphony no. 7 better known?
Leningrad

By what name is Felix Mendelssohn's Symphony no. 4 better known?
Italienische `Italian'

By what name is Felix Mendelssohn's Symphony no. 5 better known?
Reformation

By what name is Franz Joseph Haydn's Symphony no. 31 better known?
Hornsignal

By what name is Franz Joseph Haydn's Symphony no. 94 better known?
Mit dem Paukenschlag `The Surprise'

By what name is Franz Joseph Haydn's Symphony no. 100 better known?
Militär `Military'

By what name is Franz Joseph Haydn's Symphony no. 101 better known?
Die Uhr `The Clock'

By what name is Franz Joseph Haydn's Symphony no. 104 better known?
London

By what name is Franz Schubert's Symphony no. 4 better known?
Tragische `Tragic'

By what name is Franz Schubert's Symphony no. 8 better known?
Unvollendete `Unfinished'

By what name is Franz Schubert's Symphony no. 9 better known?
The Great

By what name is Franz Schubert's Symphony no. 10 better known?
The Last

By what name is Gustav Mahler's Symphony no. 1 better known?
Der Titan

By what name is Gustav Mahler's Symphony no. 2 better known?
Auferstehung `Resurrection'

By what name is Gustav Mahler's Symphony no. 6 better known?
Tragic

By what name is Gustav Mahler's Symphony no. 7 better known?
Song of the Night

By what name is Gustav Mahler's Symphony no. 8 better known?
Symphony of a Thousand

By what name is Ludwig van Beethoven's 5th piano concerto better known?
Emperor

By what name is Ludwig van Beethoven's Symphony no. 3 better known?
Eroica

By what name is Ludwig van Beethoven's Symphony no. 5 better known?
Schicksalssinfonie `Fate Symphony'

By what name is Ludwig van Beethoven's Symphony no. 6 better known?
Pastorale

By what name is Ludwig van Beethoven's Symphony no. 9 better known?
Choral

By what name is Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's Symphony no. 6 better known?
Pathétique

By what name is Ralph Vaughn Williams's Symphony no. 2 better known?
London

By what name is Robert Schumann's Symphony no. 1 better known?
Spring

By what name is Sergei Prokofiev's Symphony no. 1 better known?
Classical

By what name is Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's Symphony no. 31 better known?
Paris

By what name is Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's Symphony no. 38 better known?
Prague

By what name is Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's Symphony no. 41 better known?
Jupiter

Critical for oil, what largest man-made port of the Middle East in the United Arab Emirates that opened in 1979 handles shipping traffic coming through the Strait of Hormuz and the Persian Gulf?
Jebel Ali

What Italian language did Dante Alighieri's Divine Comedy help to establish?
Tuscan

What program did DeepMind create that won the fourteenth Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction with a median global distance test score of 92.4?
AlphaFold 2

Define ``abase.''
behave in a way that belittles or degrades (someone)

Define ``abdominous.''
(of a person) having a large belly; fat

Define ``aberrant.''
departing from an accepted standard

Define ``abjure.''
solemnly renounce (a belief, cause, or claim)

Define ``absquatulate.''
leave abruptly

Define ``accidie.''
spiritual or mental sloth; apathy

Define ``acme.''
the point at which something is at its best or most highly developed

Define ``acquiesce.''
accept something reluctantly but without protest

Define ``acquihire.''
buy out (a company) primarily for the skills and expertise of its staff, rather than for its products or services

Define ``acrimonious.''
(typically of speech or discussion) angry and bitter

Define ``adduce.''
cite as evidence

Define ``adhibit.''
apply or affix (something) to something else

Define ``adjourn.''
break off (a meeting, legal case, or game) to resume it later

Define ``admonish.''
warn or reprimand someone firmly; advise or urge (someone) earnestly

Define ``adrenergic.''
relating to or denoting nerve cells in which adrenaline, noradrenaline, or a similar substance acts as a neurotransmitter

Define ``adulate.''
praise (someone) excessively

Define ``adust.''
scorched, burned

Define ``aeolian.''
borne, deposited, produced, or eroded by the wind

Define ``aerobrake.''
cause a spacecraft to slow down by flying through a planet's rarefied atmosphere to produce aerodynamic drag

Define ``afaksi.''
Samoan person with some European ancestry

Define ``affability.''
the quality of having a friendly and good-natured manner

Define ``affinal.''
concerning or having a family relationship by marriage

Define ``afflatus.''
divine creative impulse or inspiration

Define ``affronté.''
(heraldry) (of an animal's head) facing the observer

Define ``agentive.''
taking an active role; producing an effect

Define ``agglutination.''
(with reference to bacteria or red blood cells) clump together; (of a language) combine (word elements) to express compound ideas

Define ``aggrandize.''
increase the power, status, or wealth of; enhance the reputation of (someone) beyond what is justified by the facts

Define ``aggrieved.''
feeling resentment at having been unfairly treated

Define ``aghast.''
filled with horror or shock

Define ``agist.''
take in and feed (livestock) for payment

Define ``agnostic.''
person who believes that nothing is known or can be known of the existence or nature of God; (computing) (in combination) denoting or relating to hardware or software that is compatible with many types of platform or operating system

Define ``agog.''
very eager or curious to hear or see something

Define ``agogic.''
relating to or denoting accentuation within musical phrases by slight lengthening of notes

Define ``agrarian.''
relating to cultivated land or the cultivation of land

Define ``aiguille.''
sharp pinnacle of rock in a mountain range

Define ``alacritous.''
brisk or lively

Define ``albescent.''
growing or shading into white

Define ``alcaic.''
using or denoting a verse metre occurring in four-line stanzas

Define ``aleatory.''
depending on the throw of a dice or on chance; random; relating to or denoting music or other forms of art involving elements of random choice (sometimes using statistical or computer techniques) during their composition, production, or performance

Define ``alee.''
on the side of a ship that is sheltered from the wind; leeward

Define ``alethic.''
denoting modalities of truth, such as necessity, contingency, or impossibility

Define ``alevin.''
newly spawned salmon or trout still carrying the yolk

Define ``aliform.''
wing-shaped

Define ``aliphatic.''
relating to or denoting organic compounds in which carbon atoms form open chains (as in the alkanes), not aromatic rings

Define ``allochthonous.''
denoting a deposit or formation that originated at a distance from its present position

Define ``allosteric.''
relating to or denoting the alteration of the activity of an enzyme by means of a conformational change induced by a different molecule

Define ``alpenglow.''
the rosy light of the setting or rising sun seen on high mountains

Define ``ambient.''
relating to the immediate surroundings of something

Define ``ambulate.''
walk; move about

Define ``ameliorate.''
make (something bad or unsatisfactory) better

Define ``amicable.''
characterized by friendliness and absence of discord

Define ``anachronistic.''
belonging to a period other than that being portrayed

Define ``aphelion.''
the point farthest from the sun in the path of an orbiting celestial body (such as a planet)

Define ``august.''
marked by majestic dignity or grandeur

Define ``austere.''
severe or strict in manner or attitude

Define ``brusque.''
abrupt or offhand in speech or manner

Define ``chunter.''
talk or grumble monotonously

Define ``collimate.''
to make parallel

Define ``consanguineous.''
relating to or denoting people descended from the same ancestor

Define ``deference.''
polite submission and respect

Define ``erudite.''
having or showing great knowledge or learning

Define ``farrago.''
confused mixture: hodgepodge

Define ``fastidious.''
very attentive to and concerned about accuracy and detail

Define ``hubris.''
excessive pride or self-confidence

Define ``inculcate.''
instil (an idea, attitude, or habit) by persistent instruction

Define ``inculpate.''
accuse or blame

Define ``legerdemain.''
sleight of hand; a display of skill and adroitness

Define ``maelstrom.''
situation or state of confused movement or violent turmoil

Define ``magnanimous.''
generous or forgiving, especially towards a rival or less powerful person

Define ``mellifluous.''
(of a sound) pleasingly smooth and musical to hear

Define ``multitudinous.''
very numerous

Define ``nabob.''
person of great wealth or prominence

Define ``nadir.''
the lowest or most unsuccessful point in a situation

Define ``ombudsman.''
official appointed to investigate individuals' complaints against a company or organization, especially a public authority

Define ``pandiculation.''
stretching and stiffening especially of the trunk and extremities (as when fatigued and drowsy or after waking from sleep)

Define ``peccant.''
guilty of a moral offence: sinning; violating a principle or rule: faulty

Define ``perihelion.''
the point nearest to the sun in the path of an orbiting celestial body (such as a planet)

Define ``phlegmatic.''
(of a person) having an unemotional and stolidly calm disposition

Define ``pleonasm.''
the use of more words than are necessary to convey meaning

Define ``poignant.''
evoking a keen sense of sadness or regret

Define ``progenitor.''
person or thing from which a person, animal, or plant is descended or originates; person who originates a cultural or intellectual movement

Define ``rectitudinous.''
characterized by the quality of being honest and morally correct; piously self-righteous

Define ``restitution.''
the restoration of something lost or stolen to its proper owner

Define ``sedulous.''
(of a person or action) showing dedication and diligence

Define ``stentorian.''
extremely loud

Define ``succinct.''
(especially of something written or spoken) briefly and clearly expressed

Define ``tergiversate.''
make conflicting or evasive statements: equivocate

Define ``vaticinate.''
foretell the future

Define ``verboten.''
prohibited by dictate

Define ``veridical.''
truthful

Define ``verisimilitude.''
the appearance of being true or real

Define ``vituperate.''
blame or insult (someone) in strong or violent language

At the mouth of what river is Dublin situated?
Liffey

During what age, beginning around 1000 BC, did iron become the most valued material for weapons and tools in some parts of the world?
Iron Age

During what period, beginning in 9000 BC, did humans obtain food by raising crops and animals and use primarily stone, bone, and wood tools?
Neolithic

During what series of civil wars in France from 1648 to 1653 did the nobles rise in rebellion against Mazarin and the court during the minority of Louis XIV?
Fronde

What charter did English nobles force King John to seal (15 June 1215)? Later, it was annulled by Pope Innocent III (24 August 1215), leading to the First Barons' War.
Magna Carta Libertatum

By what pseudonym was Eric Blair better known?
George Orwell

Excluding Homer's, the writings of what man, who collected myths about Theogony, are the earliest surviving Greek literary texts?
Hesiod

For what Hungarian family was F. J. Haydn a court musician?
Esterházy

What 12 figures do five pendentives along the sides and the two at the ends of the Sistine Chapel ceiling depict?
seven prophets of Israel and five sibyls who predicted the coming of the Messiah: Jonah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Joel, Zechariah, Isaiah, Daniel; Persian, Erythraean, Delphic, Cumaean, Libyan Sibyls

For what ballet, along with six string quartets, did Ludwig van Beethoven gain notoriety in 1801?
The creatures of Prometheus

By what pseudonym is François-Marie Arouet better known?
Voltaire

From St. Peter to Pope Francis, how many popes have there been?
two hundred and sixty-six

From what country did Emmental cheese originate?
Switzerland (from the canton of Bern)

From what modern-day country did Miguel de Cervantes, author of Don Quixote, hail?
Spain

From where did Apollo 11 launch?
Kennedy Space Center

His most notable works include Appalachian spring and Fanfare for the common man. What American composer, pianist, and conductor of Lithuanian descent established a distinctive American style in his compositions by borrowing from jazz, folk, and other traditional music?
Aaron Copland

His mother plunged him into the Styx during his infancy, making his body invulnerable except for the heel by which she held him. What hero of the Trojan War and son of Peleus and Thetis killed Hector but later was wounded in the heel by an arrow shot by Paris and died?
Achilles

What brightly-coloured powder do people throw into the air and on others on Holi, a Hindu festival?
abir

How are Mozart's works catalogued?
Köchel number

How big is an acre?
43,560 square feet

How long is an angstrom?
$10^{-10}$ m (0.1 nm)

How many constellations does the IAU recognize?
eighty-eight

How many feet are in a fathom?
six

How many grand slam titles does Roger Federer have?
twenty

How many major championships has Jack Nicklaus won?
eighteen

How many member states does the Commonwealth of Nations have?
fifty-four

How many pecks are in a bushel?
four

How many sheets of paper are in a quire?
twenty-five

How many sides does an enneadecagon have?
nine

How many sonnets did Shakespeare write?
one hundred fifty-four

How many suras does the Quran contain?
one hundred fourteen

How many vertices does an octahedron have?
six

What is the ability of an individual or group to carry out a particular economic activity more efficiently than another individual or group?
absolute advantage

In God's covenant with Abraham, what ceremonial rite was made mandatory for all of Abraham's male descendants?
circumcision (Gen. 17.9--14)

What is res ipsa loquitur?
the principle that the occurrence of an accident implies negligence (the thing speaks for itself)

What are the four moments in Lectio Divina, established by St. Benedict?
Lectio, Meditatio, Oratio, Contemplatio,

Who caused thousands of deaths by toppling the two main pillars in a large building in the Bible?
Samson (Judg. 16.23--30)

The covenant between God and Israel at Sinai was broken almost immediately after its agreement by the Israelites. What did they do that was an infringement of the covenant?
they built and worshipped a graven image, the golden calf (Exod. 32)

A new covenant is instituted by Jesus in the New Testament. What does he use to symbolize this new covenant?
wine, the blood of sacrifice (Mark 14.24)

In what battle did Napoleon's forces suffer a major defeat against a coalition of Russian, Prussian, Austrian, and Swedish armies in 1813?
Battle of Leipzig

In what city was Felix Mendelssohn born on 3 February 1809?
Hamburg

Where was the first opera house, the Teatro di San Cassiano, opened in 1637?
Venice

Where is Mount Ararat?
Turkey

In what countries is the Tokaj wine region located?
Hungary, Slovakia

What English county birthed Cheddar cheese?
Somerset

Identify the J. D. Salinger short story: A World War II veteran who has trouble adjusting to civilian life befriends a young Sybil Carpenter during a beach vacation but ends the trip by taking his own life.
``A Perfect Day for Bananafish''

What Midwestern town saw Dvořák write some of his most beloved pieces?
Spillville, Iowa

In what Mozart opera seria --- the penult of his operatic corpus --- is a new emperor loved by many with the exception of his daughter, who attempts to get the throne for herself?
La clemenza di Tito

In what present-day country is Richard Strauss's Der Rosenkavalier set?
Austria

In what present-day country is Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's Le nozze di Figaro set?
Spain

In what Stone Age phase (roughly 250000--9000 BC) did humans use stone, bone, and wood tools and obtain food by gathering and hunting?
Palaeolithic

In what Vincenzo Bellini opera seria does a druid priestess fall in love with a Roman general who leaves her but gets captured, when they are all sacrificed together?
Norma

In what year did Giuseppe Verdi die?
1901

Into what body of water does the Danube drain?
Black Sea

Into what body of water does the Ganges empty?
Bay of Bengal

Into what body of water does the Jordan River drain?
Dead Sea

Into what body of water does the Mississippi River empty?
Gulf of Mexico

Into what body of water does the Rhine empty?
North Sea

Into what body of water does the Tigris empty?
Persian Gulf

Into what body of water does the Yukon River empty?
Bering Sea

Into what body of water named after a hydrographer does the Mackenzie River empty?
Beaufort Sea

Into what most northeast part of the tropical Atlantic Ocean do the Niger and Volta drain?
Gulf of Guinea

Into what region of Africa has the Sahara been extending southward?
Sahel

What are the three particles into which a neutron decays?
proton, electron, electron antineutrino

What were the three parts into which Sigmund Freud divided the human psyche?
id, ego, super-ego

What are the three parts of Dante Alighieri's Divine comedy?
Inferno, Purgatorio, Paradiso

Its eponym, an English theoretical physicist, provided the argument for the existence of what black body radiation that black holes release due to quantum effects near the black hole's event horizon?
Hawking radiation

Just north of what city do the White Nile and the Blue Nile meet?
Khartoum

Marco Polo told the stories of his travels to his cellmate, who would later publish Marco Polo's chronicles in Book of the marvels of the world (c. 1300). What was his name?
Rustichello da Pisa

What title did Mongolian leader Temujin receive after defeating his rivals in 1206?
Genghis Khan

What phenomenon do most of the twenty-one non-centrosymmetric crystal classes exhibit, causing the generation of an electric field by mechanical deformation?
piezoelectricity

Where did Mozart write his Symphony no. 36 during a stopover?
Linz

Name some operas composed by Verdi.
Nabucco, Rigoletto, Il trovatore, La traviata, Aida, Otello, Falstaff

Name some operas indited by Mozart.
Idomeneo, Don Giovanni, Così fan tutte, Die Entführung aus dem Serail, The marriage of Figaro, The magic flute, La clemenza di Tito

Name some operas written by Puccini.
La bohème, Tosca, Madama Butterfly, Gianni Schicchi, Turandot

Name some Wagnerian music dramas.
Das Liebesverbot, Rienzi, Der fliegende Holländer, Tannhäuser, Lohengrin, Tristan und Isolde, Die Meistersinger, Parsifal

Name the Plagues of Egypt.
water to blood, frogs, lice or gnats, wild animals or flies, pestilence of livestock, boils, thunderstorm of hail and fire, locusts, darkness for three days, death of firstborn (Exod. 7--11)

Named after a Norwegian sovereign, what Antarctic territory borders the Atlantic Ocean and was claimed by Norway in 1939?
Queen Maud Land

Nielsen's Symphony no. 4 is also known as what?
Det Uudslukkelige `The Inextinguishable'

Of what complex are the contractile protein filaments of muscle tissue composed?
actomyosin

Of what major river is the Rio Negro a tributary?
Amazon

Of what was the altar in the tabernacle made?
acacia wood covered with bronze (Exod. 27.1)

On Good Friday of what year was Johann Sebastian Bach's St. Matthew Passion first performed?
1727

On what date was Ludwig van Beethoven's Ninth Symphony premiered in the Theater am Kärntnertor, Vienna?
7 May 1824

On what island in the Korea Strait below the Korean Peninsula is Hallasan, South Korea's highest mountain, located?
Jeju Island

On what Philippine island did Magellan die?
Cebu

On what river is Florence located?
Arno

On what river is Victoria Falls?
Zambezi

Opened in 336 BC, at what Athenian garden did Aristotle teach philosophy?
Lyceum

Originally built from Rome to Capua, what strategically important road connected Rome and Brindisi?
Appian Way

What marble sculpture did Pope Julius II commission Michelangelo to sculpt in 1505 for his tomb in San Pietro in Vincoli?
Moses

Renowned for his designs in Vicenza, what Italian architect who wrote the treatise The four books of architecture emulated an ancient Roman temple portico in his design for an estate for Daniele Barbaro, with whom he collaborated on an edition of the writings of Vitruvius?
Andrea Palladio

By what pseudonym is Samuel Langhorne Clemens is better known?
Mark Twain

Serebryakov's country estate is the setting of what Chekhov play in which Serebryakov's brother-in-law falls in love with his wife Yelena, who is in love with Astrov?
Uncle Vanya

Of what republic was Simón Bolívar elected president in 1819?
Gran Colombia

Simón Bolívar's triumph at what battle ensured Venezuela's independence?
Battle of Carabobo

Whose assassination on 6 October 1981 brought Hosni Mubarak to power in Egypt?
Anwar Sadat

What food does not go bad?
honey

What seawater inlet do the Bab-el-Mandeb Strait and the Gulf of Aden connect, bordered by Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Egypt, Sudan, Eritrea, and Djibouti to the Indian Ocean?
Red Sea

The composer of Pierrot Lunaire, what teacher of Berg and Webern wrote a cantata that tells the story of the love between Tove and Waldemar, a Danish king?
Arnold Schoenberg

What fresco does the Convent of Sta. Maria delle Grazie, Milan house?
The Last Supper

The covenant after the Flood was made not only between God and man but also between God and the animals and the earth. What did God give as the sign of this covenant?
rainbow (Gen. 9.13)

What shogunate's establishment by Shogun Minamoto no Yoritomo commenced 675 years of Japanese shogunate rule?
Kamakura shogunate

What house that included Louis XIII/XIV was founded by someone known for the quote ``Paris is well worth a mass''?
House of Bourbon

Who painted The Ghent altarpiece and The Arnolfini portrait?
Jan van Eyck

Between what two countries is the Gulf of Bothnia situated?
Sweden, Finland

Of what can the Henderson--Hasselbalch equation help to estimate the pH?
buffer solution

What mountain massif in the Himalayas contains the seventh-highest mountain in the world?
Dhaulagiri

What marginal sea is bounded by the Kamchatka Peninsula, the Kuril Islands, Hokkaido, and Sakhalin?
Sea of Okhotsk

The members of what religious order have included St. Albert the Great and St. Thomas Aquinas and were given the nickname ``Black Friars'' due to their outer garments?
Dominican order

What poet wrote ``An die Freude,'' used in Beethoven's 9th Symphony?
Friedrich Schiller

What composer frequented the Red Hedgehog --- a Viennese coffeehouse?
Brahms

Whose death was followed by the Roman Empire's split between East and West?
Theodosius the Great

The Sahara, the world's largest subtropical desert, extends from the Atlantic Ocean to what sea?
Red Sea

Whose Symphony no. 2 was subtitled ``St. Florian'' and structured after the Mass Ordinary?
Alfred Schnittke

Under the direction of what Mughal Emperor was the the Taj Mahal, completed circa 1649, built?
Shah Jahan

What nation's independence did the Thirty-Three Orientals (including its second president, Manuel Oribe) secure?
Uruguay

What statute did Theodosius the Great issue in 380, making Christianity the official religion of the Roman Empire?
Edict of Thessalonica

This battle took place in northern France in 1415. What Hundred Years War battle in which Henry V defeated a large French army mainly by using the longbow allowed Henry to occupy Normandy?
Battle of Agincourt

This city is located in Uttar Pradesh on the River Jumna. What city of north India, founded in the early sixteenth century, was the Mughal Empire's capital until 1658 and is the site of the Taj Mahal?
Agra

This family of Italian painters consisted of Annibale, Agostino, and their cousin Ludovico. What surname is associated with the family that established a teaching academy in Bologna while Annibale became famed for his frescos on the Farnese Gallery's ceiling in Rome and his invention of the caricature?
Carracci

This Greek playwright wrote a trilogy of tragedies. Who wrote the Oresteia, telling the story of Agamemnon's murder at the hands of his wife Clytemnestra and the vengeance of their son Orestes?
Aeschylus

This Greek/Roman mythological figure was Anchises's and Aphrodite's son and the Romans' legendary ancestor. What Trojan leader escaped Troy when it fell to the Greeks to reach Italy, all told in Virgil's Aeneid?
Aeneas

Though the tradition of Nine Lessons and Carols is associated with King's College, Cambridge, whence does the tradition actually originate?
Truro Cathedral, Cornwall

Through what body of water bounded by the Long Strait, Point Barrow, and the Bering Strait does the International Date Line cross?
Chukchi Sea

To what year is the first Olympics traditionally dated?
776 BC

To whom did a six-winged crucified angel appear, giving him stigmata?
St. Francis of Assisi

To whom did God speak about the ``gates of death''?
Job (38.17)

To whom is the acquisition of the Torah from Heaven traditionally attributed?
Moses

To whom of Saul's descendants was King David kind?
Mephibosheth

Traditionally, brie was produced in wheels of what diameter?
23--37 cm

Under the pontificate of whom was the Second Vatican Council closed?
Paul VI

Under the pontificate of whom was the Second Vatican Council opened?
Pope John XXIII

Under what renowned painter did Leonardo da Vinci study?
Andrea del Verrocchio

Under whom did the Visigoths sack Rome (410)?
Alaric

What does ``mens rea'' mean?
guilty mind: the intention or knowledge of wrongdoing that constitutes part of a crime, as opposed to the action or conduct of the accused

The word ``vacation'' comes from the Latin ``vacatio,'' meaning what?
freedom, exemption

What force that involves beta decay and violates parity conservation according to the experimental results of Wu Chien-Shiung do W and Z bosons mediate?
weak (force, interaction)

What eleventh month of the civil and fifth of the religious year in the Jewish calendar usually coincides with July and August?
Av

What twentieth century playwright who earned a Nobel Prize for Literature in part for Six Characters in Search of an Author contrasted art with life and explored the boundaries of reality in Henry IV?
Luigi Pirandello

What 1260 battle in which the Islamic Mamluks were victorious signalled the waning of the Mongol Empire?
Battle of Ain Jalut

What 1701 statute vested the British Crown in Sophia of Hanover and her Protestant heirs, excluding Roman Catholics, including the Stuarts, from succession to the Crown?
Act of Settlement

What 1956 crisis caused by Anglo-American refusal to finance the Aswan High Dam and Nasser's subsequent nationalization of a theretofore private entity (that in itself led to an Israeli invasion of the Sinai Peninsula and Anglo-French intervention) brought down Anthony Eden's government and eroded British influence in the Middle East?
Suez Crisis

What 1983 Nobel laureate who profiled a medieval clergyman in The Spire, described the demise of the Neanderthals in The Inheritors, and detailed young men attempting to self-govern in his first novel Lord of the Flies won the Booker Prize for Rites of Passage?
Sir William Golding

What ``a'' term is another term for 3D printing?
additive manufacturing

What abugida script was developed in ancient India and is used by languages such as Hindi, Punjabi, and Sanskrit?
Devanagari

What account of the Greco-Persian wars was written by Herodotus circa 440?
Histories

What acid with the chemical formula CH3COOH gives vinegar its characteristic taste?
acetic/ethanoic acid

What African Great Lake and fourth-largest freshwater lake in the world by volume has its primary outflow as the Shire River and its chief inflow as the Ruhuhu River?
Lake Malawi

What agreement signed on 14 June 1985 and named after a town in Luxembourg led to the abolishment of most European national borders?
Schengen Agreement

What Algerian nationalist leader (1899--1989) was president of the provisional government of the Algerian republic from 1958 and was appointed the first president of independent Algeria in 1962?
Ferhat Abbas

What almond-shaped mass of grey matter found inside each cerebral hemisphere is involved with the experiencing of emotions?
amygdala

What American playwright was initially associated with the Theatre of the Absurd and wrote Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (1962)?
Edward Albee

What American social reformer, feminist, and pacifist founded Hull House and won the Nobel Peace Prize (1931)?
Jane Addams

What American wrote novels such as Narratives of empire, focusing on prominent people and events in US history; Myra Breckinridge, a controversial work; and The city and the pillar?
Gore Vidal

What crystalline solid with a characteristic musty odour bears the chemical formula CH3CONH2?
acetamide/ethanamide

What amino acid is a constituent of most proteins, is systematically named ``2-aminopropanoic acid,'' has the chemical formula CH3CH(NH2)COOH, and is encoded by all codons starting with ``GC''?
alanine

What analgesic drug used to relieve mild or chronic pain and to reduce fever is also called ``paracetamol'' or ``Tylenol''?
acetaminophen

What Anglo-Saxon monk, writer, and grammarian known as Grammaticus wrote Lives of the Saints (993-96)?
Ælfric

What annual publication gives information about European royalty, nobility, and diplomats and was established in 1763?
Almanach de Gotha

What antiviral drug used chiefly to treat herpes and AIDS is also called ``Zovirax''?
acyclovir

What apostle told the early Christians that all believers were anointed by the Holy Spirit?
Paul (2 Cor. 1.21)

What architect designed the Basílica de la Sagrada Família?
Antoni Gaudí

What architect designed the Guggenheim Museum branch in Bilbao, Spain?
Frank Gehry

What architect published a collection of 100 of his drawings in the Wasmuth portfolio, introduced a planned development called Broadacre City in his book The disappearing city, and designed the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Unity Temple, and Fallingwater?
Frank Lloyd Wright

What are amaretti?
Italian almond-flavoured biscuits

What are amicable numbers?
numbers whose sums of factors are the same

What are bonds between lipids called?
ester linkages

What are particles with half-integer spins called?
fermions

What are particles with integer spins called?
bosons

What's another name for the east doors of the Florence Baptistery, completed by Lorenzo Ghiberti?
Gates of Paradise

What are the four epic music dramas of Der Ring des Nibelungen?
Das Rheingold, Die Walküre, Siegfried, Götterdämmerung

What are the levels of taxonomy?
domain, kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, species

What are the names of Mars's two moons?
Deimos, Phobos

What are the parts of a Mass ordinary?
Kyrie, Gloria, Credo, Sanctus, Agnus Dei

What are the parts of tragedy as identified by Aristotle in Poetics?
mythos (plot or the structure of actions), ethos (character), dianoia (thought or theme), lexis (diction or speech), melos (melody or music-dance), opsis (spectacle)

What are the seven emirates of the UAE?
Abu Dhabi, Ajman, Dubai, al-Fujayrah, Ras al-Khaimah, Sharjah, Umm al-Qaiwain

What are the seven hills of Rome?
Aventine, Caelian, Capitoline, Esquiline, Palatine, Quirinal, Viminal

What are the seven Millennium Prize Problems?
P versus NP problem, Hodge conjecture, Poincaré conjecture, Riemann hypothesis, Yang--Mills existence and mass gap, Navier--Stokes existence and smoothness, Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture

What are the seven summits?
Everest, Aconcagua, Denali, Kilimanjaro, Elbrus, Vinson, Puncak Jaya, Mont Blanc

What are the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World?
Great Pyramid of Giza, Hanging Gardens of Babylon, Temple of Artemis at Ephesus, Statue of Zeus at Olympia, Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, Colossus of Rhodes, Lighthouse of Alexandria

What are the short fragments of DNA that are a result of the synthesis of the lagging strand during DNA replication called?
Okazaki fragments

What are the six kingdoms?
Eubacteria, Archaebacteria, Protista, Fungi, Plantae, Animalia

What are the world's ten highest mountains?
Everest, K2, Kangchenjunga, Lhotse, Makalu, Cho Oyu, Dhaulagiri I, Manaslu, Nanga Parbat, Annapurna I

What are the three domains?
Bacteria, Archaea, Eukarya

What are the three main systems of Japanese writing?
kanji, hiragana, katakana

What are the three regions of Belgium?
Brussels, Flanders, Wallonia

What arid region of western Chile is the driest non-polar desert in the world?
Atacama Desert

What arm of the Mediterranean Sea separates the Italian Riviera and Corsica?
Ligurian Sea

What arrow-shaped Iranian island in the Straight of Hormuz is Iran's largest?
Qeshm

What artery takes blood to the head and neck from the heart?
carotid artery

What Assyrian emperor was assassinated by his sons while he was worshipping in his pagan temple?
Sennacherib (2 Kings 19.37)

What astronomer wrote Astronomia nova?
Johannes Kepler

What Athenian orator and statesman opposed Demosthenes's efforts to unite the Greek city states against Macedon?
Aeschines

What Athenian teaching school did Plato found?
Academy

What Austrian psychologist and psychiatrist (1870--1937) introduced the concept of the inferiority complex and disagreed with the Freudian idea that sexual conflicts in infancy cause mental illness?
Alfred Adler

What autonomous republic in the Russian Caucasus has a sizeable Sunni Muslim population?
Adygea Autonomous Republic

What award is given annually to the author of ``the most distinguished contribution to American literature for children''?
John Newbery Medal

What ballet producer staged Igor Stravinsky's first ballets, viz. The firebird, Petrushka, and The rite of spring?
Sergei Diaghilev

What battle ended Spain's presence in Peru in 1824?
Battle of Ayacucho

What Benjamin Britten symphony, op. 44, is made up of four parts?
Spring Symphony

What best-known work of Plato, written around 375 BC, concerns justice, the order and character of the just city-state, and the just man?
Republic

What best-known work of St. Thomas Aquinas is a compendium of the main theological teachings of the Catholic Church and was meant to serve as a guide for theology students?
Summa Theologiae

What body of water borders Ukraine, Romania, Bulgaria, Turkey, Georgia, and Russia and has outflows like the Bosporus?
Black Sea

What body of water connected to the Adriatic Sea and bounded by parts of Italy and Greece, including the Peloponnese, is one of the most seismically active areas in the world?
Ionian Sea

What body of water connected to the Black Sea by the Strait of Kerch and bounded by Ukraine and Russia has inflows like the Don River and the Kuban River?
Sea of Azov

What body of water enclosed by Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Sweden, Germany, Poland, and Russia is a marginal sea of the Atlantic Ocean?
Baltic Sea

What body of water is located off the south coast of Ireland and contains the Isles of Scilly?
Celtic Sea

What body of water is the world's largest estuary?
Gulf of Ob

What body of water located off the northern coasts of Norway and Russia was the Murman Sea to Russians in the Middle Ages?
Barents Sea

What marginal sea of the Arctic Ocean once called the ``Nordenskiöld Sea'' is located between Siberia, the Taimyr Peninsula, Severnaya Zemlya, and the New Siberian Islands?
Laptev Sea

What body of water regarded as the edge of the known world for many centuries had many disappearances of ships that induced legends of monsters that stopped and sank ships?
Norwegian Sea

What body of water separates Greenland and Baffin Island?
Baffin Bay

What body of water separates the islands of Great Britain and Ireland?
Irish Sea

What body of water separates the Italian Peninsula from the Balkan Peninsula?
Adriatic Sea

What body of water shared between Tanzania, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, and Zambia is the world's second oldest, second largest (by volume), and second deepest lake?
Lake Tanganyika

What book of the Bible mentions a talking altar?
Revelation (16.7)

What bright star in one of the feet of Orion derives its name from the Arabic for ``foot''?
Rigel

What British bidding system in bridge enables partners with weaker hands to find suitable contracts?
Acol

What British general surrendered to George Washington at Yorktown, almost ending the American Revolutionary War?
Charles Cornwallis

What broad-brimmed hat is traditionally worn by farmers and cattlemen in Australia?
Akubra

What Bronze Age city located in present-day southern Greece was the capital of King Agamemnon and featured the Lion Gate?
Mycenae

What bull called for the Fourth Crusade?
Post miserabile

What Byzantine emperor codified Roman law and carried out a building program throughout the Empire, of which St. Sophia at Constantinople was a part?
Justinian

What Canadian island is known for its unusual fossil forests?
Axel Heiberg Island

What Canadian river rises in the Rocky Mountains and flows into the Strait of Georgia?
Fraser River

What Central American country does not border the Caribbean Sea?
El Salvador

What central part of the brainstem, also known as the mesencephalon, is divided into the tegmentum and tectum and develops from the middle of the primitive or embryonic brain?
midbrain

What cetacean of the Eocene had fore and hind limbs and could walk on land?
Ambulocetus

What Chancellor of the German Empire, who served as an ambassador in Paris and St. Petersburg before being named Chief Minister by William the First, presided over the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine, waved ``a red rag the Gallic Bull'' in 1870, and was called ``the Iron Chancellor''?
Otto von Bismarck

What chief port of Ivory Coast was the nation's capital from 1935 to 1983?
Abidjan

What chief tributary of the Ob that flows through Omsk is the longest tributary river in the world?
Irtysh

What Chinese-born American architect designed the east wing of the National Gallery of Art (1978) in Washington, DC, the John F. Kennedy Library (1979) in Boston, and the pyramid entrance to the Louvre (1983--89) in Paris?
I. M. Pei

What Chinese emperor began the building of the Great Wall of China?
Qin Shi Huang

What Chinese religious motif incorporating the eight trigrams of the I Ching are arranged octagonally around a symbol denoting the balance of yin and yang or around a mirror?
ba gua

What choral work of Beethoven was inscribed ``Von Herzen --- Möge es wieder --- Zu Herzen gehn'' `From the heart, may it return to the heart'?
Missa Solemnis

What chorus from Verdi's Nabucco did people sing at his funeral procession, known as the ``Chorus of the Hebrew Slaves''?
Va, pensiero, sull'ali dorate `Go, thought, on wings of gold'

What city did Brigham Young found in 1847?
Salt Lake City

What city does Airport Schipol serve?
Amsterdam

What city does Charles de Gaulle Airport serve?
Paris

What city does O'Hare International Airport serve?
Chicago

What city hosted the 1964 and 1976 Winter Olympics?
Innsbruck

What city hosted the Summer Olympics in 1900 and 1924 and will host the Summer Olympics in 2024?
Paris

What city hosted the Summer Olympics in 1908, 1948, and 2012?
London

What city hosted the Summer Olympics in 1932 and 1984 and will host the Summer Olympics in 2028?
Los Angeles

What city hosted the Summer Olympics in 1960?
Rome

What city hosted the Summer Olympics in 1988?
Seoul

What city hosted the Summer Olympics in 1992?
Barcelona

What city hosted the Summer Olympics in 2008 and the Winter Olympics in 2022?
Beijing

What city hosted the Winter Olympics in 1928 and 1948?
St. Moritz

What city hosted the Winter Olympics in 1932 and 1980?
Lake Placid

What city hosted the Winter Olympics in 1956 and will host the Winter Olympics in 2026?
Cortina d'Ampezzo

What city hosted the Winter Olympics in 1984?
Sarajevo

What city hosted the Winter Olympics in 1998?
Nagano

What city hosted the Winter Olympics in 2006?
Turin

What is the capital of Khuzestan, Iran?
Ahvaz

What city is nicknamed ``Urbs Aeterna''?
Rome

What city is the capital of Guangxi Zhuang autonomous region?
Nanning

What city is the capital of Hebei province?
Shijiazhuang

What city is the capital of Henan province?
Zhengzhou

What city is the capital of Hunan province?
Changsha

What city is the capital of Jiangxi province?
Nanchang

What city is the capital of New South Wales?
Sydney

What city is the capital of Qinghai province?
Xining

What city is the capital of Queensland?
Brisbane

What city is the capital of Shandong province?
Jinan

What city is the capital of Shanxi province?
Taiyuan

What city is the capital of Sichuan province?
Chengdu

What city is the capital of South Australia?
Adelaide

What city is the capital of Tasmania?
Hobart

What city is the capital of Victoria?
Melbourne

What city is the capital of Western Australia?
Perth

What city is the capital of Yunnan province?
Kunming

What city of northeastern India is the capital of Mizoram?
Aizawl

What city on a tributary of the River Brahmaputra is the capital of Tibet autonomous region?
Lhasa

What city on the Songhua River is the capital of Heilongjiang province?
Harbin

What city on the upper Yellow River is the capital of Gansu province?
Lanzhou

What city on the Yangtze River is the capital of Jiangsu province?
Nanjing

What city situated at the confluence of the Han and Yangtze Rivers and a conurbation of three adjacent towns is the capital of Hubei province?
Wuhan

What city was the capital of the Inca Empire?
Cuzco

What city, a seaport on the western coast of Asia Minor, was the second of the seven churches mentioned by John?
Smyrna (Rev. 2.8--11)

What city, situated in an inlet of the Yellow Sea with the same name, is the capital of Zhejiang province?
Hangzhou

What city, the leading industrial and commercial centre of southern China, is the capital of Guangdong province?
Guangzhou

What civilization, often characterized by statues of large heads, was the first developed civilization of Meso-America?
Olmec

What class of enzymes facilitates the joining of DNA strands together by catalyzing the formation of a phosphodiester bond?
DNA ligase

What classical architectural order with a wider and lower echinus than its closest relative has an unadorned frieze?
Tuscan

What cold winter desert is the largest located exclusively in China?
Taklamakan Desert

What cold winter desert located in Central Asia in the doab between the Amu Darya and the Syr Darya means ``Red Sand'' in Turkic languages?
Kyzylkum Desert

What cold winter desert located solely in Turkmenistan means ``Black Sand'' in Turkic languages?
Karakum Desert

What colourless astringent compound is a hydrated double sulphate of aluminum and potassium and used in dyeing and tanning?
alum

What colourless solid compound obtained from coal tar and used in the manufacture of dyes and drugs has chemical formula C13H9N?
acridine

What colourless volatile liquid aldehyde obtained by oxidizing ethanol has chemical formula CH3CHO?
acetaldehyde/ethanal

What colourless volatile liquid ketone made by oxidizing isopropanol and used as an organic solvent and synthetic reagent has chemical formula CH3COCH3?
acetone/propanone

What commander of the Red Shirts during the Italian unification campaign led the Uruguayan navy in a rebellion against Argentina and returned to Italy, where he gained control of Sicily and Naples in the name of Victor Emmanuel II?
Giuseppe Garibaldi

What companion of Aeneas showed such exemplary friendship that he became proverbial?
Achates

What complex system of nerves and networks in the brain involving several areas near the edge of the cortex controls the basic emotions (fear, pleasure, anger) and drives (hunger, sex, dominance, care of offspring)?
limbic system

What composer wrote the biblical oratorio Israel in Egypt?
G. F. Handel

What composer wrote the opera Fidelio?
Ludwig van Beethoven

What composer's Enigma Variations is believed to have a hidden message in its theme?
Edward Elgar

What condition causes the muscles of the lower part of the esophagus to fail to relax, preventing food from passing into the stomach?
achalasia

What condition involves certain facial blood vessels enlarging, giving the cheeks and nose a flushed appearance?
acne rosacea

What condition marked by bluish or purple colouring of the hands and feet is caused by slow circulation?
acrocyanosis

What constituent base of nucleic acids pairs with thymine in DNA and has the chemical formula C5H5N5?
adenine/6-aminopurine

What continuation of the spinal cord within the skull forms the lowest part of the brainstem and contains control centres for the heart and lungs?
medulla oblongata

What coral island group in the Indian Ocean was part of the British Indian Ocean Territory before becoming an outlying dependency of Seychelles in 1976?
Aldabra

What Corsican port is the capital of Corse-du-Sud?
Ajaccio

What cosmonaut spent the longest continuous time in space?
Valeri Polyakov (437 days)

What country does Changi Airport serve?
Singapore

What creator god of Zoroastrianism is the force of good and the opponent of Ahriman?
Ahura Mazda

What crystalline compound formed in the nitrogen metabolism of many mammals is related to hydantoin and has the chemical formula C4H6N4O3?
allantoin

What crystalline fatty acid is obtained from natural fats and used in the manufacture of nylon?
adipic/hexanedioic acid

What crystalline solid prepared by acetylation of aniline and used in dye manufacture has chemical formula C6H5NHCOCH3?
acetanilide

What cycle most directly describes the working cycle of a heat engine operating as an ideal engine of maximum thermal efficiency?
Carnot cycle

What Czech monetary unit is equal to one-hundredth of a koruna?
haler

What deep lake in the Andes on the border of Bolivia and Peru is the largest lake in South America by volume of water and surface area?
Titicaca

What deepwater gulf borders Yemen, the Arabian Sea, Djibouti, Socotra (Yemen), and Somalia and was a significant part of the Erythraean Sea to the ancient Greeks?
Gulf of Aden

What desert also called the ``Great Salt Desert'' is the largest desert located wholly in Iran?
Dasht-e Kavir

What desert in southern California, extending into Nevada, Utah, and Arizona, is the driest desert in North America?
Mojave Desert

What desert in the eastern region of the Sahara connected the northern and southern districts of the Kingdom of Kush throughout the Meroitic civilization?
Bayuda Desert

What desert on the UNESCO World Heritage List is the second-largest located completely in Iran?
Dasht-e Lut

What desert, the ninth-largest in the world, is bounded by the Orontes Valley and the volcanic field of Harrat al-Shamah to the west and the Euphrates to the east?
Syrian Desert

What did God call his human creation?
Adam (Gen. 5.2)

To what did God change Jacob's name?
Israel (Gen. 32.38)

What disaccharide consisting of two linked galactose units is present in most mammals' cell membranes, but not humans', causing rejection in animal-to-human transplants?
alpha-gal

What disease caused by inadequate secretion of hormones by the adrenal cortex is characterized by progressive anemia, low blood pressure, great weakness, and bronze discoloration of the skin?
Addison's disease

What disputed Russian island is the country's largest, administered as part of an oblast of the same name, and is located just north of Hokkaido?
Sakhalin

What do the Greek roots --cracy and --crat mean?
government, rule, authority; from κράτος

What do the Greek roots amph-- and amphi-- mean?
around, about, both, on both sides of, both kinds; from ἀμφί `on both sides'

What do the Greek roots an-- and a-- mean?
not, without

What do the Greek roots ana-- and an-- mean?
again, against, back, up; from ἀνά `again,' `against'

What do the Greek roots ant-- and anti-- mean?
against, opposed to, preventive; from ἀντί `against'

What do the Greek roots ap-- and apo-- mean?
away from, separate, at the farthest point; from ἀπό `from,' `away,' `un--,' `quite'

What do the Greek roots archae-- and arche-- mean?
ancient; from ἀρχαῖος `ancient' from arkhē `beginning'

What do the Greek roots arche-- and archi-- mean?
ruler; from ἀρχή `rule'

What do the Greek roots aut-- and auto-- mean?
self; directed from within; from αὐτός `self,' `same'

What do the Greek roots bathy-- and batho-- mean?
deep, depth; from βαθύς

What do the Greek roots call-- and calli-- mean?
beautiful; from κάλλος `beauty'

What do the Greek roots cata-- and cat-- mean?
down; from κατά `down'

What do the Greek roots cris-- and crit-- mean?
judge; from κρίσις

What do the Latin roots ab--, a--, and abs-- mean?
away from; from ab `away'

What do the Latin roots ad--, a--, ac--, af--, ag--, al--, ap--, ar--, as--, and at-- mean?
movement to or toward, in addition to; from ad `to,' `toward'

What do the Latin roots agri-- and --egri-- mean?
field; from ager, agris `field,' `country'

What do the Latin roots am--, amat--, and amor-- mean?
love, loved; from amor `love' from amāre `to love'

What do the Latin roots amic-- and --imic-- mean?
friend; from amicus

What do the Latin roots ann-- and --enn-- mean?
year, yearly; from annus `year'

What do the Latin roots ante-- and anti-- mean?
before, in front of, prior to; from ante `before,' `against'

What do the Latin roots aug-- and auct-- mean?
grow, increase; from augēre, auctus `to increase'

What do the Latin roots be-- and beat-- mean?
bless; from beare, beatus

What do the Latin roots cad--, --cid--, and cas-- mean?
fall; from cadere, casus

What do the Latin roots caed--, --cid--, caes--, and --cis-- mean?
cut; from caedere, caesus

What do the Latin roots can--, --cin--, and cant-- mean?
sing; from canere

What do the Latin roots cap--, --cip--, capt--, and --cept-- mean?
hold, take; from capere, captus `take,' `hold'

What do the Latin roots capit-- and -cipit-- mean?
head; from caput, capitis `head'

What do the Latin roots caus-- and --cus-- mean?
cause or motive; from causa

What do the Latin roots ced-- and cess-- mean?
go; from cedere, cessus

What do the Latin roots cing-- and cinct-- mean?
gird; from cingere, cinctus

What do the Latin roots claud--, --clud--, claus--, and --clus-- mean?
close; from claudere, clausus

What do the Latin roots con--, co--, col--, com--, and cor-- mean?
with, together; from cum

What do the Latin roots curr-- and curs-- mean?
run; from currere, cursus

What documents assembled in 47 volumes with 3,000 pages of narrative and 4,000 pages of appendices were compiled at MIT at the request of Secretary of Defence Robert McNamara and detailed US involvement in Vietnam?
Pentagon Papers

What does ``a battuta'' mean in music?
returning to strict tempo

What does ``a cappella'' mean?
without instrumental accompaniment; from Italian in chapel style

What does ``à deux'' mean?
for/involving two people

What does ``à la carte'' mean?
referring to food that can be ordered as separate items, rather than part of a set meal

What does ``à la mode'' mean?
in fashion; up to date

What does ``à outrance'' mean?
to the death/very end

What does ``a.i.'' abbreviate?
ad interim meaning temporarily

What does ``A/D'' mean in electronics?
analogue to digital

What does ``AB'' abbreviate?
Artium Baccalaureus `Bachelor of Arts'

What does ``ab initio'' mean?
from the beginning

What does ``Abaddon'' mean?
the Devil (Rev. 9.11) or Hell

What does ``abaft'' mean?
in or behind the stern of a ship

What does ``abatement'' mean?
the reduction or removal of a nuisance

What does ``abaxial'' mean?
facing away from the stem of a plant

What does ``abstemious'' mean?
indulging only very moderately in something, especially food and drink

What does ``acatalectic'' mean?
(of a line of verse) having the full number of syllables

What does ``according to Hoyle'' mean?
according to plan/the rules

What does ``acephalous'' mean in prosody?
(typically of a hexameter beginning with a short syllable) lacking a syllable or syllables in the first foot

What does ``acerbic'' mean?
(especially of a comment or style of speaking) sharp and forthright

What does ``achiral'' mean?
(chiefly of a molecule) symmetric in such a way that it can be superimposed on its mirror image; not chiral

What does ``acicular'' mean?
(chiefly of crystals) needle-shaped

For what does ``ACL'' stand?
anterior cruciate ligament

What does ``aculeate'' mean?
(of an insect) having a sting; sharply pointed; prickly

What does ``adamantine'' mean?
unbreakable

What does ``adaxial'' mean?
facing towards the stem of a plant

What does ``addle'' mean?
make (someone) unable to think clearly; confuse; (of an egg) become rotten, producing no chick

What does ``addorsed'' mean?
(heraldry) placed back to back

For what does ``ADF'' stand?
automatic direction finder

For what does ``ADHD'' stand?
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder

What does ``adiabatic'' mean?
relating to or denoting a process or condition in which heat does not enter or leave the system concerned

What does ``Adj.'' abbreviate?
adjutant

What does ``Adonai'' mean?
God

What does ``ADSL'' abbreviate?
asymmetric digital subscriber line: a technology for transmitting digital information over standard telephone lines which allows high-speed transmission of signals from the telephone network to an individual subscriber, but a slower rate of communication from the subscriber to the network

What does ``aet.'' abbreviate?
of or at the age of; aged

What does ``afebrile'' mean?
not feverish

What does ``afferent'' mean?
conducting or conducted inwards or towards something (for nerves, the central nervous system; for blood vessels, the organ supplied)

What does ``aft'' mean?
at, near, or towards the stern of a ship or tail of an aircraft

What does ``AGC'' abbreviate?
automatic gain control; a feature of certain amplifier circuits which gives a constant output over a wide range of input levels

What does ``agitato'' mean in music?
in an agitated manner

What does ``Agnus Dei'' mean?
Lamb of God

What does ``AGR'' abbreviate?
advanced gas-cooled reactor; a nuclear reactor in which the coolant is carbon dioxide, with uranium oxide fuel clad in steel and using graphite as a moderator

What does ``AGW'' abbreviate?
anthropogenic global warming

What does ``akimbo'' mean?
with hands on the hips and elbows turned outwards

What does ``al dente'' mean?
(of food, typically pasta) cooked so as to be still firm when bitten

What does ``al fresco'' mean?
(especially with reference to eating) in the open air

What does ``al pastor'' mean?
in the style of a shepherd; denoting a Mexican dish made with thinly sliced pork that has been seasoned with chili peppers and pineapple and roasted on a vertical spit

What does ``Allahu Akbar'' mean?
God is most great

What does ``allargando'' mean?
in a slower and broader manner

What does ``allay'' mean?
diminish or put at rest (fear, suspicion, or worry)

What does ``alow'' mean?
on or near the deck of a ship

What does ``ALS'' abbreviate?
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

What does ``AM'' abbreviate (education)?
Artium Magister `Master of Arts'

What does ``amatriciana'' mean?
denoting a spicy pasta sauce made with tomatoes, pancetta or bacon, and basil

What does ``ambulant'' mean?
(of a patient) able to walk about; not confined to bed

What is amour courtois?
courtly love

What does ``amphipathic'' mean?
having both hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts

What does ``amphiprostyle'' mean?
having a portico at each end but not at the sides

What does ``amphoteric'' mean?
able to react both as a base and as an acid

What does an ``ailurophile'' love?
cats

What does an ``ailurophobe'' fear?
cats

Of what does an alpha particle consist?
helium nucleus (2 protons, 2 neutrons)

What does ``antediluvian'' mean?
of or relating to the period before the flood described in the Bible; made, evolved, or developed a long time ago

What does ``Cap.'' abbreviate?
capitulus `chapter'

What does ``cf.'' abbreviate?
confer `bring together,' `compare'

What does ``circumlocution'' mean?
the use of many words where fewer would do, especially in a deliberate attempt to be vague or evasive

What does ``Daedalian'' mean?
ingenious, intricate, and confusing

What does ``Die Fledermaus'' mean in German?
the bat

What does ``ebrious'' mean?
drunken/intoxicated

What is force times displacement?
work

What does ``i.a.'' abbreviate?
inter alia `among other things'

What does ``i.e.'' abbreviate?
id est `that is'

What does ``imbibe'' mean?
drink (alcohol); absorb or assimilate (ideas or knowledge)

What does ``indefatigable'' mean?
(of a person or their efforts) persisting tirelessly

What does it mean to alienate someone's affections?
induce someone to transfer their affection from a person (such as a spouse) with legal rights or claims on them

What does it mean to give someone a Roland for an Oliver?
to take revenge on someone

What does ``JD'' abbreviate?
Juris Doctor `Doctor of Law'

What does ``meretricious'' mean?
apparently attractive but having no real value

What does Michelangelo's panel painting Doni Tondo, Uffizi, depict?
Holy Family

What does ``modicum'' mean?
small quantity of a particular thing, especially something desirable or valuable

Write the discriminant form $\Delta$ in terms of the modular forms $E_4$ and $E_6$.
$$ \Delta = \frac{E_4^3 - E_6^2}{1728} $$

What does ``NADP'' stand for?
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate

What does ``nefarious'' mean?
flagrantly wicked or impious: evil

What does Noether's theorem state?
to every differentiable symmetry there corresponds a conservation law

What does ``obsequious'' mean?
obedient or attentive to an excessive or servile degree

What does ``obstreperous'' mean?
noisy and difficult to control

What does ``Sic'' abbreviate?
sic erat scriptum `thus it was written'

What does the Bayeux Tapestry, consisting of seventy-five tituli, depict?
the events leading up to the Norman conquest of England concerning William, Duke of Normandy, and Harold, Earl of Wessex, later King of England, and culminating in the Battle of Hastings

What does the Finnish ``Ahvenanmaa'' mean?
Åland Islands

What does the Greek root acr-- mean?
height, summit, tip; from ἄκρος `high,' `extreme'

What does the Greek root aer-- mean?
air, atmosphere; from ἀήρ `air'

What does the Greek root aesthet-- mean?
feeling, sensation; from aisthētikos `of sense perception' from αἰσθάνεσθαι `to perceive'

What does the Greek root agr-- mean?
field; from ἀγρός `field'

What does the Greek root andr-- mean?
male, masculine; from ἀνδρός

What does the Greek root anem-- mean?
wind; from ἄνεμος

What does the Greek root anth-- mean?
flower; from ἄνθος `flower'

What does the Greek root anthrop-- mean?
human; from ἄνθρωπος `man'

What does the Greek root arct-- mean?
relating to the North Pole or the region near it; relating to cold; used as the scientific name of some bear species; from ἄρκτος `bear'

What does the Greek root arist-- mean?
excellence; from ἀρετή, ἄριστος

What does the Greek root arthr-- mean?
joint; from ἄρθρον

What does the Greek root astr-- mean?
star, star-shaped; from ἄστρον `star'

What does the Greek root athl-- mean?
prize; from ἄθλος `contest,' `feat'

What does the Greek root axio-- mean?
merit; from ἄξιος meaning `worth'

What does the Greek root bar-- mean?
weight, pressure; from βάρος

What does the Greek root basi-- mean?
at the bottom; from βαίνω, βάσις `step'

What does the Greek root bibl-- mean?
book; from βιβλίον `book'

What does the Greek root bio-- mean?
life; from βίος `life'

What does the Greek root blast-- mean?
germ, embryo, bud, cell with nucleus; from βλασταίνω

What does the Greek root blenn-- mean?
slime; from βλέννος

What does the Greek root bor-- mean?
north; from βορρᾶς

What does the Greek root botan-- mean?
plant; from βοτάνη, βότανον

What does the Greek root brachi-- mean?
arm; from βραχίων

What does the Greek root brachy-- mean?
short; from βραχύς

What does the Greek root brady-- mean?
slow; from βραδύς

What does the Greek root branchi-- mean?
gill; from βράγχιον

What does the Greek root briz-- mean?
nod, slumber; from βρίζω

What does the Greek root brom-- mean?
oats; from βρόμος, βρόμη `oats'; stench; from βρόμος `stench,' `clangour'

What does the Greek root bronch-- mean?
windpipe; from βρόγχος

What does the Greek root bront-- mean?
thunder; from βροντή

What does the Greek root cac-- mean?
bad; from κακός

What does the Greek root calyp-- mean?
cover; from καλύπτειν

What does the Greek root cardi-- mean?
relating to the heart; from καρδιά `heart'

What does the Greek root carp-- mean?
relating to fruit or to the wrist; from καρπός `fruit,' `wrist'

What does the Greek root cathar-- mean?
pure; from καθαρός

What does the Greek root cen-- mean?
new; from καινός; empty; from κενός

What does the Greek root centr-- mean?
centre; from κέντρον `needle,' `spur'

What does the Greek root cephal-- mean?
head; from κεφαλή

What does the Greek root ceram-- mean?
clay; from κέραμος

What does the Greek root cerat-- mean?
horn; from κέρας, κέρατος `horn'

What does the Greek root chelon-- mean?
relating to a turtle; from χελώνη `tortoise'

What does the Greek root chir-- mean?
of the hand or hands; from χείρ `hand'

What does the Greek root chlor-- mean?
green; from χλωρός `green'

What does the Greek root chore-- mean?
relating to dance; from χορεία `dancing in unison' from χορός `chorus'

What does the Greek root chrom-- mean?
colour; from χρῶμα `colour'

What does the Greek root chron-- mean?
time; from χρόνος

What does the Greek root chrys-- mean?
gold; from χρυσός `gold'

What does the Greek root cine-- mean?
motion; from κινέω

What does the Greek root cirr-- mean?
orange; from κιρρός

What does the Greek root clad-- mean?
branch; from κλάδος

What does the Greek root clast-- mean?
broken; from κλαστός

What does the Greek root clav-- mean?
key; from κλείς `key' from κλείειν `to close'

What does the Greek root cleist-- mean?
closed; from κλειστός

What does the Greek root cochl-- mean?
shell; from κόχλος

What does the Greek root coel-- mean?
hollow; from κοῖλος

What does the Greek root con-- mean?
cone; from κῶνος

What does the Greek root copr-- mean?
feces; from κόπρος

What does the Greek root corac-- mean?
raven; from κόραξ, κόρακος

What does the Greek root cosm-- mean?
universe; from κόσμος

What does the Greek root cotyl-- mean?
cup; from κοτύλη

What does the Greek root crani-- mean?
skull; from κρανίον

What does the Greek root crep-- mean?
boot, shoe; from κρηπίς, κρηπίδος

What does the Greek root cross-- mean?
fringe, tassel; from κροσσός

What does the Greek root crypt-- mean?
hidden; from κρυπτός

What does the Greek root cten-- mean?
comb; from κτείς, κτενός

What does the Greek root cub-- mean?
cube; from κύβος

What does the Greek root cyan-- mean?
blue; from κυανός

What does the Greek root cycl-- mean?
circular; from κύκλος

What does the Greek root cylind-- mean?
roll; from κύλινδρος

What does the Greek root cyn-- mean?
dog; from κύων, κυνός

What does the Greek root cyst-- mean?
capsule; from κύστις

What does the Greek root cyt-- mean?
cell; from κύτος

What does ``lo stivale'' mean?
the boot

What does the Latin ``a fortiori'' mean?
from stronger

What does the Latin ``a posteriori'' mean?
from what comes after

What does the Latin ``a priori'' mean?
from the earlier

What does the Latin ``ab ovo'' mean?
from the egg

What does the Latin ``ad hoc'' mean?
to this

What does the Latin ``ad hominem'' mean?
to the person

What does the Latin ``ad infinitum'' mean?
to infinity

What does the Latin ``ad libitum'' mean?
according to pleasure

What does the Latin ``ad litem'' mean in law?
for the lawsuit

What does the Latin ``ad personam'' mean?
to a person

What does the Latin ``ad rem'' mean?
to the matter

What does the Latin ``ad valorem'' mean?
according to the value

What does the Latin ``alea iacta est'' mean?
the die is cast

What does the Latin ``ars longa, vita brevis'' mean?
art is long, life is short

What does the Latin ``casus belli'' mean?
cause of war

What does the Latin cost-- mean?
rib; from costa

What does the Latin ``de facto'' mean?
something that happens in practice but is not necessarily established by law (from fact)

What does the Latin ``ex cathedra'' mean?
with the full authority of office, especially that of the Pope (from the chair)

What does the Latin ``ex post facto'' mean?
realized with hindsight (after the fact)

What does the Latin ``in flagrante delicto'' mean?
caught in the act (in the burning crime)

What does the Latin ``ne plus ultra'' mean?
without equal, the greatest degree (none more beyond)

What does the Latin ``primus inter pares'' mean?
first among equals

What does the Latin ``quid pro quo'' mean?
something given in exchange for something else (this for that)

What does the Latin ``quis custodiet ipsos custodes'' mean?
who shall protect us against those who, supposedly, protect us? (who watches the watchers?)

What does the Latin root ac-- mean?
sharp or pointed; from acere

What does the Latin root acerb-- mean?
sharp, bitter, sour; from acidus

What does the Latin root acid-- mean?
sour or acid; from acidus

What does the Latin root acr-- mean?
bitter, pungent, sharp, sour; from acer, acris

What does the Latin root acu-- mean?
sharp; from acutus, past participle of acuere `to sharpen,' from acus `needle'

What does the Latin root adip-- mean?
fat; from adeps, adipis `fat'

What does the Latin root alb-- mean?
dull white; from albus

What does the Latin root ambi-- mean?
both, on both sides; from ambi `on both sides'

What does the Latin root ampl-- mean?
ample, abundant, bountiful; from amplus

What does the Latin root anim-- mean?
breath; from anima `breath'

What does the Latin root aqu-- mean?
water; from aqua

What does the Latin root ar-- mean?
plow, till; from arāre; be dry; from ārēre `be dry or parched'

What does the Latin root argent-- mean?
silver; from argentum

What does the Latin root audi-- mean?
hearing, listening, sound; from audire `to hear'

What does the Latin root aur-- mean?
relating to gold, or gold-coloured; from aurum `gold'

What does the Latin root auri-- mean?
relating to the ear; from auris `ear'

What does the Latin root avi-- mean?
bird; from avis

What does the Latin root axi-- mean?
axis; from axis

What does the Latin root bac-- mean?
rod-shaped; from baculum `rod'

What does the Latin root bell-- mean?
war; from bellum, belli

What does the Latin root ben-- mean?
good, well; from bene

What does the Latin root bi-- mean?
two; from bis `twice'; bini `in twos'

What does the Latin root bib-- mean?
drink; from bibere, bibitus

What does the Latin root bon-- mean?
good; from bonus

What does the Latin root bov-- mean?
cow, ox; from bos, bovis

What does the Latin root brev-- mean?
brief, short (time); from brevis, breviare

What does the Latin root bucc-- mean?
cheek, mouth, cavity; from bucca

What does the Latin root bulb-- mean?
bulbous; from bulbus

What does the Latin root bull-- mean?
bubble, flask; from bulla `bubble'

What does the Latin root burs-- mean?
pouch, purse; from bursa

What does the Latin root calor-- mean?
heat; from calor `heat'

What does the Latin root camer-- mean?
vault; from camera

What does the Latin root camp-- mean?
field; from campus `field,' `level ground'

What does the Latin root can-- mean?
dog; from canis

What does the Latin root cand-- mean?
glowing, iridescent; from candere `to be white or glisten'

What does the Latin root capr-- mean?
goat; from caper, capri

What does the Latin root caps-- mean?
box, case; from capsa

What does the Latin root carbo-- mean?
coal; from carbo, carbonis

What does the Latin root carcer-- mean?
jail; from carcer, carcerare

What does the Latin root carcin-- mean?
cancer (disease); from Greek καρκίνος `crab'

What does the Latin root cardin-- mean?
hinge; from cardo, cardinis

What does the Latin root carn-- mean?
flesh; from caro, carnis

What does the Latin root cast-- mean?
pure; from castus `chaste'

What does the Latin root caten-- mean?
chain; from catena

What does the Latin root caud-- mean?
tail; from cauda

What does the Latin root cav-- mean?
hollow; from cavus `hollow'

What does the Latin root celer-- mean?
quick; from celer, celerare

What does the Latin root cent-- mean?
hundred; from centum

What does the Latin root centen-- mean?
hundred each; from centeni

What does the Latin root centesim-- mean?
hundredth; from centesimus

What does the Latin root cern-- mean?
sift; from Latin cernere

What does the Latin root cervic-- mean?
relating to the neck or cervix; from cervix, cervicis `neck'

What does the Latin root ceter-- mean?
other; from ceterus

What does the Latin root cili-- mean?
eyelash; from cilium

What does the Latin root ciner-- mean?
ash; from cinis, cineris

What does the Latin root circ-- mean?
circle; from circus

What does the Latin root circum-- mean?
around; from circum

What does the Latin root cirr-- mean?
curl, tentacle; from cirrus

What does the Latin root civ-- mean?
citizen; from civis

What does the Latin root clar-- mean?
clear; from clarus, clarare

What does the Latin root clement-- mean?
mild; from clemens, clementis

What does the Latin root clin-- mean?
bed, lean, recline; from --clinare

What does the Latin root cogn-- mean?
know; from cognoscere

What does the Latin root col-- mean?
strain; from colare, colum

What does the Latin root coll-- mean?
hill; from collis; neck; from collum

What does the Latin root condi-- mean?
season; from condire

What does the Latin root contra-- mean?
against; from contra

What does the Latin root cord-- mean?
heart; from cor, cordis

What does the Latin root corn-- mean?
horn; from cornu

What does the Latin root coron-- mean?
crown; from corona, coronare

What does the Latin root corpor-- mean?
body; from corpus, corporis

What does the Latin root cortic-- mean?
bark; from cortex, corticis

What does the Latin root crass-- mean?
thick; from crassus

What does the Latin root cre-- mean?
make; from creare, creatus

What does the Latin root cred-- mean?
believe, trust; from credere, creditus

What does the Latin root cribr-- mean?
sieve; from cribrum, cribrare

What does the Latin root crisp-- mean?
curled; from crispus

What does the Latin root crist-- mean?
tuft, plume, crest; from crista

What does the Latin root cruc-- mean?
cross; from crux, crucis

What does the Latin root crur-- mean?
leg, shank; from crus, cruris

What does the Latin root cub-- mean?
lie; from cubare

What does the Latin root culin-- mean?
kitchen; from culina

What does the Latin root culp-- mean?
blame, fault; from culpa

What does the Latin root cune-- mean?
wedge; from cuneus

What does the Latin root curv-- mean?
bent; from curvus

What does the Latin root cuspid-- mean?
lance, point; from cuspis, cuspidis

What does the Latin root cut-- mean?
skin; from cutis

What does the Latin ``sub rosa'' mean?
happening or done in secret

What does the Latin ``tabula rasa'' mean?
blank slate

What does the Latin ``terra firma'' mean?
often used figuratively to refer to certainty (solid ground)

What does the Latin/Greek root calc-- mean?
stone; from Latin calx `lime' and from Greek χάλιξ `pebble,' `limestone'

What does the Latin/Greek root chord-- mean?
cord; from chorda `rope' from χορδή

What does ``viz.'' abbreviate?
videlicet `namely,' `that is to say'

(1545--92) What Duke of Parma and Italian general captured Antwerp in 1585 while in the service of Philip II, securing the southern Netherlands for Spain?
Alessandro Farnese

What dynasty of caliphs ruled Baghdad from 750 to 1258?
Abbasid

What dynasty ruled in Persia from Cyrus I to Darius III (553--330 BC)?
Achaemenid

What dynasty's achievements include fertilizer, junk ships, the compass, gunpowder, printing, and paper money, and whose southern division fell to the Mongols in 1279?
Song

What early twentieth century Russian poetry movement rejected symbolism favouring formal technique and clarity of exposition and had members like Anna Akhmatova and Osip Mandelstam?
Acmeism/Guild of Poets

What economic and social campaign was led by the CCP from 1958 to 1962?
Great Leap Forward

What edict did Constantine and Licinius issue in 313, making Christianity legal in the Roman Empire?
Edict of Milan

What edict signed in April 1958 by Henry IV granted the Huguenots (Calvinist Protestants) substantial rights?
Edict of Nantes

What effect involves the production of a potential difference across an electrical conductor when a magnetic field is applied in a direction perpendicular to that of the flow of current?
Hall effect

What Egyptian leader nationalized the Suez Canal in 1956?
Gamal Abdel Nasser

What elementary particles are massless?
photon, gluon

What elongated embayment of the Mediterranean Sea separates the Greek and Anatolian peninsulas and contains islands such as Crete and Rhodes on its southern periphery?
Aegean Sea

What elongated ridge on the floor of each lateral ventricle of the brain is thought to be the centre of emotion, memory, and the ANS?
hippocampus

What English aviator made the first non-stop transatlantic flight in June 1919 with Sir Arthur Whitten Brown?
Sir John William Alcock

What English composer who collaborated with W. H. Auden on Hymn to St. Cecilia and the operetta Paul Bunyan wrote Gloriana for Queen Elizabeth II's coronation and composed Peter Grimes?
Benjamin Britten

What English essayist, poet, playwright, and Whig politician noted for his simple, unornamented prose style founded The Spectator with Sir Richard Steele in 1711?
Joseph Addison

What English novelist and essayist wrote of his experiences with psychedelic drugs in The doors of perception after writing Antic hay and Brave new world?
Aldous Huxley

What English novelist wrote The four feathers and Musk and amber?
A. E. W. Mason

What English philosopher and proponent of logical positivism (1910--89) was part of the Vienna Circle and wrote Language, truth, and logic?
Sir A. J. Ayer

What English playwright and actor is noted for Beyond the fringe (1960), Forty years on (1969), and Talking heads (1987)?
Alan Bennett

What English playwright is known chiefly for comedies dealing with suburban and middle-class life, such as Relatively speaking (1967) and Absurd person singular (1973)?
Sir Alan Ayckbourn

What English poet and classical scholar wrote the cycle of poems A Shropshire lad?
A. E. Housman

What English poet wrote ``In Memoriam,'' ``The Charge of the Light Brigade,'' and Idylls of the King?
Alfred Tennyson

What English writer wrote Winnie-the-Pooh?
A. A. Milne

What enzyme catalyzes the deamination of adenosine to inosine?
adenosine deaminase

What enzyme catalyzes the formation of cyclic adenylic acid from ATP?
adenylate cyclase

What epeiric sea borders Great Britain, Denmark, Norway, Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, and France?
the North Sea

What Tigrayan town was a religious centre and the capital of a powerful kingdom between the first and sixth centuries?
Axum/Aksum

What is Europe's longest river?
Volga

What European channel links the Adriatic Sea with the Ionian Sea, separating the heel of Italy from Albania?
Strait of Otranto

What executive order issued by President Lincoln freed all slaves?
Emancipation Proclamation

What explorer established a colony on the west coast of Greenland circa 986?
Erik the Red

What explorer established a short-lived settlement at Vinland in North America circa 1000?
Leif Erikson

What extensive shallow sea on the Sunda Shelf lying between Borneo to the north, Sumatra to the west, Sulawesi to the east, and an island of the same name to the south is linked to the South China Sea by the Karimata Strait?
Java Sea

What extinct language written in cuneiform and with dialects Assyrian and Babylonian was widely used from about 3500 BC and is the oldest Semitic language for which records exist?
Akkadian

What extreme right-wing political movement in Germany formed in 2014 aimed to resist what it perceived as the increasing influence of Islam in western Europe?
Pegida

What family of Italian violin makers whose name begins with ``A'' developed basic proportions of the violin, viola, and cello in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries?
Amati

What Finnish architect designed the Gateway Arch and the TWA Flight Center at John F. Kennedy International Airport?
Eero Saarinen

(feast day: 22 June) What first British Christian martyr was put to death for sheltering a fugitive priest?
St. Alban

What fishing port and holiday resort is on the north coast of Crete, east of Heraklion?
Aghios Nikolaos

What Florentine artist and architect set out the rules of linear perspective in the Renaissance?
Filippo Brunelleschi (BROO-nə-LESK-ee)

What Florentine painter who painted The birth of Venus is said to embody the spirit of the Renaissance?
Sandro Botticelli

What former capital and most populated city of Gujarat is located on the banks of the Sabarmati River?
Ahmedabad

What former dictator of Chile overthrew President Salvador Allende?
Augusto Pinochet

What former endorheic lake lying between Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan has drastically shrunk since Soviet irrigation projects diverted rivers that fed it in the 1960s?
Aral Sea

What four moons of Jupiter are, collectively, the Galilean moons?
Io, Europa, Ganymede, Callisto

What fourth-century Roman grammarian wrote two artes grammaticae --- an Ars Major and an Ars Minor --- that would be used in schools in the Middle Ages?
Aelius Donatus

What French chemist with Joseph-Bienaimé Caventou isolated the green pigment of leaves and gave it the name ``chlorophyll''?
Pierre-Joseph Pelletier

What French king ordered the building of the Palace of Versailles?
Louis XIV

What French label/certification is granted to certain French geographical indications for wines, cheeses, and butters and is based on the concept of terroir and a form of geographic protectionism?
AOC (appellation d'origine contrôlée)

What French mathematician, physicist, and philosopher is most famous for the Traité de dynamique (1743) in which he developed his own laws of motion?
Jean le Rond d'Alembert

What French mathematician and considered founder of group theory who formed an interest in mathematics at 14 after he entered the Lycée Louis-le-Grand died aged 20 after partaking in a politically-motivated monomachy?
Évariste Galois

What French motor racing driver won the F1 world championship in 1985, 1986, 1989, and 1993?
Alain Prost

What French novelist, Benedictine monk, and priest penned Manon Lescaut: the inspiration for operas by Massenet and Puccini?
Abbé Prévost

What French philosopher significantly transformed literary and cultural theory in giving a reinterpretation of conventional Marxism in the light of structuralist theories?
Louis Althusser

What French philosopher wrote Madness and civilization and The order of things?
Michel Foucault

What French physicist (1852--1908) discovered the natural radioactivity in uranium salts with Marie and Pierre Curie?
Antoine-Henri Becquerel

What French scholar deciphered the Rosetta Stone?
Jean-François Champollion

What French scholar, theologian, and philosopher (1079--1142) is famous for his tragic love affair with his pupil Héloïse?
Peter Abelard

What freshwater African Great Lake has its primary outflow as the White Nile and is Africa's largest by area?
Lake Victoria

What freshwater lake of tectonic origin intermittently joined to Lake Managua by the Tipitapa River is the world's nineteenth largest lake (and the largest in Central America)?
Lake Nicaragua

What function does acetylcholinesterase serve?
stopping the excitation of a nerve after transmission of an impulse

What Galileo Galilei astronomical treatise, published in 1610, announced a series of astronomical discoveries made using his home-made telescope?
Starry messenger

What German bacteriologist identified the organisms causing anthrax, tuberculosis, and cholera, winning a Nobel Prize in 1905?
Robert Koch

What German Benedictine abbess (the Sibyl of the Rhine) who described her mystical experiences in Scivias was one of the best-known composers of sacred monophony, the founder of scientific natural history in Germany, and the creator of Lingua Ignota?
St. Hildegard of Bingen

What German composer composed Orpheus and Eurydice?
Christoph Willibald Gluck

What German composer, violinist, and conductor invented the violin chinrest and orchestral rehearsal mark and introduced the conductor's baton to England?
Louis Spohr

What German conductor was the leading conductor to remain in Germany during World War II and is widely regarded as the greatest symphonic and operatic conductor of the twentieth century?
Wilhelm Furtwängler

What German organic chemist (1835--1917) prepared the first barbiturates, synthesized and determined indigo's structural formula, and won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry (1905)?
Adolf von Baeyer

What German physicist invented the apochromatic lens?
Ernst Abbe

What German psychologist established the first psychology laboratory and founded psychology as a separate discipline?
Wilhelm Wundt

What Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina mass not based upon a cantus firmus was written in honour of Pope Marcellus II?
Missa Papae Marcelli

What Greek hero who was given a letter ordering his death after he rejected the advances of Queen Stheneboea tamed and rode Pegasus?
Bellerophon

What Greek island was the legendary home of Odysseus?
Ithaca

What Greek lyric poet of Mytilene invented a new form of lyric metre called the ``alcaic,'' wrote political odes, drinking songs, and love songs, and was a model for Horace and the verse of the Renaissance?
Alcaeus

What greyish waxy substance is formed by the decomposition of soft tissue in dead bodies subjected to moisture?
adipocere

What group of about 40 islands in the West Pacific forms part of Papua New Guinea?
Admiralty Islands

What group of Homo erectus, with brains as large as those of modern humans, flourished in Europe and Western Asia between 150,000 and 30,000 years ago?
Neanderthals

What group of islands in the Gulf of Bothnia forms an autonomous region of Finland with capital Mariehamn?
Åland Islands

What group of painters influenced by Gaugin was founded by Paul Sérusier; had members including Pierre Bonnard and Édouard Vuillard; and took its name from the Hebrew term for ``prophet''?
les nabis

What group of sacred Hindu texts, sometimes called ``Shruti,'' has four sections: Rig, Sama, Yajur, and Atharva?
Vedas

What group of spectacular granite peaks in southern Chile rise to a height of 2,668 m?
Paine Towers

What gruesome object did the Philistines fasten in the temple of Dagon?
Saul's head (1 Chron. 10.10)

What gulf connects the Arabian Sea with the Strait of Hormuz, bordering Iran and Pakistan on the north, Oman on the south, and the United Arab Emirates on the west?
Gulf of Oman

What gulf of the northeast Atlantic Ocean borders France from Point Penmarc'h to the Spanish border and the north coast of Spain west to Cape Ortegal?
Bay of Biscay

What hadronic subatomic particle is composed of a quark-antiquark pair?
meson

What heavenly fields mentioned in the Odyssey had no snow or rain but were cooled by the west wind?
Elysium

What Hebrew minor prophet was a shepherd of Tekoa and lived during Jeroboam II's and Uzziah's reigns?
Amos

What heretical Catharist sect of southern France in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries believed in a form of Manichean dualism and had a stringent moral and social code?
Albigenses

What hero of Wagner's Der Ring des Nibelungen slays the dragon Fafner (originally from the Nibelungenlied)?
Siegfried

What high priest of Jerusalem put Jesus on trial?
Caiaphas (John 11.49--53)

What Himalayan massif includes Broad Peak and contains three 8,000 m peaks?
Gasherbrum

What Himalayan region has been occupied by China since 1950 but is claimed by India as part of Kashmir?
Aksai Chin

What Hindu epic written in Sanskrit contains discussions of dharma and the soul's immortality, details the struggles between two groups of cousins --- including the warrior Arjuna --- for their family's throne, and is literature's longest-known poem?
Mahabharata

What Hindu poem composed between the second century BC and the second century AD and incorporated into the Mahabharata presented a dialogue between the Kshatriya prince Arjuna and his divine charioteer Krishna?
Bhagavadgita

What holy man was anointed by an immoral woman?
Jesus (Luke 7.38)

What holy object was taken by the Philistines into the temple of Dagon, causing Dagon's image to fall down?
Ark of the Covenant (1 Sam. 5.2--4)

What hormone, also called ``adrenaline,'' is secreted mainly by the medulla of the adrenal glands and functions primarily to increase cardiac output and to raise glucose levels in the blood?
epinephrine

What hunter that accidentally saw Artemis bathing was charged by her into a stag and killed by his own hounds?
Actaeon

What hypothesis says that expectations of future values of a variable can be based primarily on its values in the recent past?
adaptive expectations hypothesis

What icy moon of Saturn has the chemical elysingredients needed for life and hydrothermal vents in its ocean?
Enceladus

What important Manchurian city between the seventeenth and early twentieth centuries is the capital of Liaoning province?
Shenyang

What Indian national registration system assigns individuals 12-digit numbers for identification purposes?
Aadhaar

What Indian poet and playwright lived during the reign of Chandra Gupta II and is best known for Sakuntala?
Kalidasa

What industrial city and spa in western Germany called ``Aix-la-Chapelle'' in French awards the Charlemagne Prize (German: Karlspreis) to someone who serves to unify Europe?
Aachen

What industrial city is the capital of Anhui province?
Hefei

What industrial city is the capital of Guizhou province?
Guiyang

What industrial city is the capital of Jilin province?
Changchun

What industrial city, previously the capital of the Han, Sui, and Tang dynasties, is the capital of Shaanxi province?
Xi'an

What insect, along with honey, did John the Baptist eat in the desert?
locusts (Matt. 3.4)

What instrument did Edwin Fischer play?
piano

What instrument is used to measure the intensity of radiation (especially UV radiation)?
actinometer

What instrument measures electric current?
ammeter

What interaction that can be calculated as a Yukawa potential is responsible for holding protons and neutrons together in the nucleus?
strong (force, interaction)

What Irish playwright, best-known for the play Waiting for Gadot, won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1969?
Samuel Beckett

What is a ``figure of speech in which a part is made to represent the whole or vice versa''?
synecdoche

What is a beam in one's eye?
fault that is greater in oneself than in the person one is finding fault with (Matt. 7.3)

What is a blot on one's escutcheon?
stain on one's reputation or character

What is a cheesemonger?
person who sells cheese, butter, and other dairy products

What is a chyron?
caption superimposed over usually the lower part of a video image (as during a news broadcast)

What is a dithyramb?
wild choral hymn of ancient Greece, especially one dedicated to Dionysus

What is a false dichotomy?
occurs when an argument presents two options and ignores, either purposely or out of ignorance, other alternatives and gives the impression that the two are mutually exclusive

What is a hagiography?
writing of the life of a saint; a biography that treats its subject with undue reverence

What is a Kaddish?
ancient Jewish prayer sequence regularly recited in the synagogue service, including thanksgiving and praise and concluding with a prayer for universal peace

What is a kairomone?
chemical substance emitted by an organism and detected by another of a different species which gains advantage from this, e.g. a parasite seeking a host

What is a lens called that transmits light without separating it into constituent colours?
achromat

What is a limerick?
humorous five-line poem with rhyme scheme AABBA

What is a logogram?
sign or character representing a word or phrase

What is a monolith?
large and impersonal political, corporate, or social structure regarded as intractably indivisible and uniform

What is a neophyte?
person who is new to a subject or activity

What is a palaver?
unnecessarily elaborate or complex procedure

What is a pedant?
person who is excessively concerned with minor details and rules or with displaying academic learning

What is a regicide?
the action of killing a king; a person who kills or takes part in killing a king

What is a rollmop?
pickled herring fillet

What is a TEU?
twenty-foot equivalent unit (a unit of cargo capacity)

What is a tort?
wrongful act or an infringement of a right (other than under contract) that leads to civil legal liability

What is a triptych?
picture or relief carving on three panels, typically hinged together vertically and used as an altarpiece

What is a vomitorium?
series of entrance/exit passages in an ancient Roman amphitheatre or theatre

What is a writ of certiorari?
order of a higher court to a lower court to send all documents in a case so the higher court can review it

What is a xebec?
small three-masted Mediterranean sailing ship with lateen and square sails

What is a ziggurat?
rectangular stepped tower of Ancient Mesopotamia sometimes surmounted by a temple

What is aa?
basaltic lava forming very rough, jagged masses with a light frothy texture

What is Abenomics?
the economic policies of the Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe, associated with monetary and fiscal stimulus and economic reforms

What is ABH in English law?
actual bodily harm; minor injury, such as bruising, inflicted on a person by the deliberate action of another, considered less serious than grievous bodily harm

What is abiogenesis?
the original evolution of life or living organisms from inorganic or inanimate substances

What is ablaut?
alternation in the vowels of related word forms, especially in Germanic strong verbs

What is absinthe?
potent green aniseed-flavoured alcoholic spirit, made with the shrub wormwood

What is absolute music?
instrumental music not intended to represent or illustrate something else; the opposite of program music

What is abulia?
absence of willpower or an inability to act decisively, a symptom of schizophrenia or other mental illness

What is acetylcholine?
compound that occurs throughout the nervous system where is functions as a neurotransmitter

What is achlorhydria?
absence of hydrochloric acid in the gastric secretions

What is achondroplasia?
hereditary condition in which the growth of long bones by ossification of cartilage is retarded, resulting in very short limbs and sometimes a face which is small in relation to the skull

What is acromegaly?
abnormal growth of the hands, feet, and face, caused by overproduction of growth hormone by the pituitary gland

What is ACTH?
adrenocorticotropic hormone; a hormone secreted by the pituitary gland and stimulating the adrenal cortex

What is actus reus?
action or conduct that is a constituent element of a crime as opposed to the mental state of the accused (``guilty act'')

What is acumen?
the ability to make good judgements and take quick decisions

What is adenocarcinoma?
malignant tumour formed from glandular structures in epithelial tissue

What is Advaita?
Vedantic doctrine that identifies the individual self (atman) with the ground of reality (brahman) often associated with Shankara

What is adverse procession?
the occupation of land to which another person has title with the intention of possessing it as one's own

What is advocaat?
liqueur made with eggs, sugar, and brandy

What is aerophagia?
the swallowing of air

What is aeroponics?
plant-cultivation technique in which the roots hang suspended in the air while nutrient solution is delivered to them in the form of a fine mist

What is Æsir?
Norse gods and goddesses collectively

What is affirmative action?
(in the context of the allocation of resources or employment) the practice or policy of favouring individuals belonging to groups known to have been discriminated against previously; positive discrimination

What is affluenza?
psychological malaise supposedly affecting wealthy young people, symptoms of which include a lack of motivation, feelings of guilt, and a sense of isolation

What is agammaglobulinemia?
lack of gamma globulin in the blood plasma, causing immune deficiency

What is agamospermy?
asexual reproduction in which seeds are produced from unfertilized ovules

What is agar?
gelatinous substance obtained from certain red seaweeds and used in biological culture media and as a thickener in foods

What is agarose?
substance which is the main constituent of agar and is used especially in gels for electrophoresis; a polysaccharide mainly containing galactose residues

What is agflation?
rising food prices caused by increased demand for agricultural commodities

What is aggregate demand?
the total demand for goods and services within a particular market

What is aggregate supply?
the total supply of goods and services available to a particular market from producers

What is agitprop?
political (originally communist) propaganda, especially in art or literature

What is agnosia?
inability to interpret sensations and hence to recognize things, typically as a result of brain damage

What is agrammatism?
tendency to form sentences without the correct inflectional structure as a result of brain damage, as in Broca's aphasia

What is agranulocytosis?
deficiency of granulocytes in the blood, causing increased vulnerability to infection

What is agraphia?
inability to write, as a language disorder resulting from brain damage

What is aguardiente?
distilled liquor resembling brandy, especially as made in South America from sugar cane

What is ahimsa?
respect for all living things and avoidance of violence towards others, especially in Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism

What is ainhum?
condition in which a band of fibrous tissue grows around the base of a toe, eventually resulting in loss of the digit

What is aioli?
mayonnaise seasoned with garlic

What is akasha?
(traditional Indian cosmology) a supposed all-pervading field in the ether in which a record of past events is imprinted

What is akinesia?
loss or impairment of the power of voluntary movement

What is akrasia?
the state of mind in which someone acts against their better judgement through weakness of will

What is al-Nakba?
Palestinian term for the events of 1948 when many Palestinians were displaced by the creation of the new state of Israel

What is alabaster?
translucent form of gypsum or calcite, typically white, often carved into ornaments

What is albedo?
the proportion of the incident light or radiation that is reflected by a surface, typically that of a planet or moon

What is albite?
sodium-rich mineral of the feldspar group, typically white, occurring in silicate rocks

What is albumen?
egg white, or the protein contained in it

What is albumin?
simple form of protein that is soluble in water and coagulable by heat, such as that found in egg white, milk, and (in particular) blood serum

What is albuminuria?
the presence of albumin in the urine, typically as a symptom of kidney disease

What is aldicarb?
systemic agricultural pesticide used against some mites, insects, and nematode worms

What is aldosterone?
corticosteroid hormone that stimulates absorption of sodium by the kidneys so regulates water and salt balance

What is alexia?
inability to recognize or read written words or letters, typically as a result of brain damage

What is alexithymia?
the inability to recognize or describe one's own emotions

What is alfisol?
soil of an order comprising leached basic or slightly acid soils with a clay-enriched B horizon

What is alginic acid?
insoluble gelatinous carbohydrate found (chiefly as salts) in many brown seaweeds used as a thickener in foods and many other materials

What is algolagnia?
desire for sexual gratification through inflicting pain on oneself or others—sadomasochism

What is alimentation?
the provision of nourishment or other necessities of life

What is alimony?
financial support that a person is ordered by a court to give to their spouse during separation or following divorce; maintenance

What is allanite?
brownish-black mineral of the epidote group, consisting of a silicate of rare earth metals, aluminium, and iron

What is alopecia?
the partial or complete absence of hair from areas of the body where it normally grows—baldness

What is alprazolam?
drug of the benzodiazepine group, used in the treatment of anxiety

What is altocumulus?
cloud forming a layer of rounded masses with a level base, occurring at medium altitude

What is altostratus?
cloud forming a continuous uniform layer which resembles stratus but occurs at medium altitude

What is altruism?
disinterested and selfless concern for the well-being of others

What is amaretto?
brown almond-flavoured liqueur produced in Italy

What is amaurosis?
partial or total blindness without visible change in the eye, typically due to disease of the optic nerve, spinal cord, or brain

What is ambivalence?
the state of having mixed feelings or contradictory ideas about something or someone

What is amblyopia?
impaired or dim vision without obvious defect or change in the eye

What is amboyna?
the decorative timber of a rapidly growing south-eastern Asian tree used for cabinetmaking

What is amenorrhea?
absence of menstruation

What is amianthus?
variety of asbestos with fine silky fibres which can be woven

What is amitriptyline?
antidepressant drug of the tricyclic group, with a mild tranquillizing action

What is amity?
friendly relations

What is amniotic fluid?
the fluid surrounding a fetus within the amnion

What is amoebiasis?
infection with amoebas, especially as causing dysentery

What is amontillado?
medium dry sherry wine

What is amortization?
the action or process of gradually writing off the initial cost of an asset

What is amour fou?
uncontrollable or obsessive passion (insane love)

What is amour propre?
sense of one's own worth; self-respect

What is amoxicillin?
semi-synthetic penicillin closely related to ampicillin and with similar properties, but more readily absorbed when taken orally

What is amphimixis?
sexual reproduction involving the fusion of two different gametes to form a zygote

What is ampicillin?
semi-synthetic form of penicillin used to treat infections of the urinary and respiratory tracts

What is an A-line garment?
garment slightly flared from a narrow waist or shoulders

What is an abattoir?
slaughterhouse (British)

What is an abaya?
full-length outer garment worn by some Muslim women

What is an abductor in anatomy?
muscle whose contraction moves a limb or part away from the midline of the body or another part

What is an abelian group?
commutative group

What is an ablative absolute?
Latin construction that consists of a noun and participle or adjective in the ablative case and functions as a sentence adverb, for example, Deo volente `God willing'

What is an abomasum?
the fourth stomach of a ruminant, which receives food from the omasum and passes it to the small intestine

What is an acaricide?
substance poisonous to mites or ticks

What is an acciaccatura?
grace note performed as quickly as possible before an essential note of a melody

What is an accoucheur?
male midwife

What is an accretion disk?
rotating disc of matter formed by accretion around a massive body (such as a black hole) under the influence of gravitation

What is an acinus?
small saclike cavity in a gland, surrounded by secretory cells

What is an acolyte?
person assisting a priest in a religious service or procession; an assistant or follower

What is an acrolect?
the most prestigious dialect or variety of a particular language

What is an action potential?
the change in electrical potential associated with the passage of an impulse along the membrane of a muscle cell or nerve cell

What is an adage?
proverb or short statement expressing a general truth

What is an adductor?
muscle whose contraction moves a limb or other part of the body towards the midline of the body or another part

What is an adipocyte?
cell specialized for the storage of fat, found in connective tissue

What is an adit?
horizontal passage leading into a mine for access or drainage

What is an adjutant?
military officer who acts as an administrative assistant to a senior officer

What is an administratrix?
female administrator of an estate

What is an adret?
mountain slope which faces the sun

What is an adstratum?
language or group of elements within it that is responsible for changes in a neighbouring language

What is an Adullamite?
member of a dissident political group (originally applied to a group of British MPs who seceded from the Liberal party in 1866)

What is an adytum?
the innermost sanctuary of an ancient Greek temple

What is an adz?
tool similar to an axe, with an arched blade at right angles to the handle, used for cutting or shaping large pieces of wood

What is an affaire de cœur?
love affair

What is an Affenpinscher?
dog of a small breed resembling the griffon

What is an affidavit?
written statement confirmed by oath or affirmation for use as evidence in court

What is an affirmative defence?
any defence in which the burden of proof rests upon the defendant and of which the defendant must prove relevant elements

What is an affogato?
Italian dessert consisting of vanilla ice cream topped with a shot of espresso coffee

What is an affricate?
phoneme which combines a plosive with an immediately following fricative or spirant sharing the same place of articulation

What is an aficionado?
person who is very knowledgeable and enthusiastic about an activity, subject, or pastime

What is an agent provocateur?
person employed to induce others to break the law so that they can be convicted

What is an agglutinative language?
language tending to express concepts in complex words consisting of many elements, rather than by inflection or by using isolated elements

What is an agglutinin?
antibody, lectin, or other substance that causes agglutination

What is an agglutinogen?
antigenic substance present in blood cells, bacteria, etc. that stimulates the formation of an agglutinin in blood serum

What is an agio?
the percentage charged on the exchange of one currency, or one form of money, into another that is more valuable

What is an agma?
the speech sound of ng as in thing, a velar nasal consonant represented by the symbol ŋ in the IPA

What is an agnate?
(law) a person descended from the same male ancestor as another specified or implied person, especially through the male line

What is an agonist in the setting of biochemistry?
substance which initiates a physiological response when combined with a receptor

What is an agonist in the anatomical sense?
muscle whose contraction moves a part of the body directly

What is an aide-de-camp?
military officer acting as a confidential assistant to a senior officer

What is an aigrette?
headdress consisting of a white egret's feather or other decoration such as a spray of gems

What is an aiguillette?
ornament on some military and naval uniforms consisting of braided loops hanging from the shoulder and on dress uniforms ending in points that resemble pencils

What is an aileron?
hinged surface in the trailing edge of an aircraft wing, used to control roll around the longitudinal axis

What is an aitchbone?
the buttock or rump bone of cattle

What is an Akita?
spitz (dog) of a Japanese breed

What is an alameda?
(in Spain and Spanish-speaking areas) a public walkway or promenade, shaded with trees

What is an alb?
white vestment reaching to the feet worn by clergy and servers in some Christian Churches

What is an alcalde?
magistrate or mayor in a Spanish, Portuguese, or Latin American town

What is an alcazar?
Spanish palace or fortress of Moorish origin

What is an alcove?
recess in the wall of a room or garden

What is an alderman?
elected member of a city council

What is an Aldis lamp?
handheld lamp for signalling in Morse code

What is an alembic?
distilling apparatus, now obsolete, consisting of a gourd-shaped container and a cap with a long beak for conveying the products to a receiver

What is an Alexander technique?
system designed to promote well-being by retraining one's awareness and habits of posture to ensure minimum effort and strain

What is an alexandrine?
verse of six iambic feet

What is an alexandrite?
gem variety of chrysoberyl which appears green in daylight and red in artificial light

What is an Alford plea in American law?
guilty plea in which a defendant maintains their innocence but admits that the prosecution's evidence would likely result in a guilty verdict if brought to trial

What is an Alfvén wave?
transverse magnetohydrodynamic wave travelling in the direction of the magnetic field in a magnetized plasma

What is an alguacil?
each of a pair of mounted constables acting as an official at a bullfight

What is an alidade?
sighting device or pointer for determining directions or measuring angles, used in surveying

What is an aliquot?
portion of a larger whole, especially a sample taken for chemical analysis or other treatment

What is an alisphenoid?
winglike cartilaginous bone within a mammal's skull, forming part of the socket of the eye

What is an allegory?
story, poem, or picture that can be interpreted to reveal a hidden meaning, typically a moral or political one

What is an allele?
each of two or more alternative forms of a gene that arise by mutation and are found at the same place on a chromosome

What is an allelochemical?
chemical produced by a living organism that exerts a detrimental physiological effect on individuals of another species when released into the environment

What is an allelomorph?
allele

What is an allemande?
any of a number of German dances, in particular an elaborate court dance popular in the sixteenth century

What is an allocution?
formal speech giving advice or a warning

What is an allodium?
estate held in absolute ownership, without acknowledgement to a superior

What is an almandine?
kind of garnet with a violet tint

What is an almucantar?
circle on the celestial sphere parallel to the horizon; a parallel of altitude

What is an alpargata?
light canvas shoe with a plaited fibre sole; espadrille

What is an alpha blocker?
any of a class of drugs which prevent the stimulation of the adrenergic receptors responsible for increased blood pressure

What is an altazimuth?
telescope mounting that moves in azimuth (about a vertical axis) and in altitude (about a horizontal axis); a surveying instrument for measuring vertical and horizontal angles, resembling a theodolite but larger and more precise

What is an amanuensis?
literary or artistic assistant, in particular one who takes dictation or copies manuscripts—scribe

What is an ambassador plenipotentiary?
ambassador with full powers to sign treaties or otherwise act for the state or monarch

What is an ambulacrum?
each of the radially arranged bands, together with their underlying structures, through which the double rows of tube feet protrude in an echinoderm

What is an amicus curiae?
impartial advisor to a court of law in a particular case

What is an Amidah?
(Judaism) prayer consisting of a varying number of blessings recited while the worshippers stand

What is an amniocentesis?
process in which amniotic fluid is sampled using a hollow needle inserted into the uterus, to screen for abnormalities in the developing fetus

What is an amoretto?
representation of Cupid in a work of art

What is an ampelographer?
expert in the study and classification of cultivated varieties of grape

What is an amphibrach?
metrical foot consisting of a stressed syllable between two unstressed syllables or (in Greek and Latin) a long syllable between two short syllables

What is an amphora?
tall ancient Greek or Roman jar or jug with two handles and a narrow neck

What is an ansatz?
educated guess or additional assumption made to help solve a problem that is later verified to be part of the solution by its results

What is an apogee?
the highest point of an orbit

What is an AU?
astronomical unit: the mean distance from the centre of the earth to the centre of the sun

What is an aumbry?
small recess or cupboard in the wall of a church

What is an éclaircissement?
enlightening explanation of something that has hitherto been obscure or inexplicable

What is an eidolon?
spectre or phantom

What is an exegesis?
critical explanation or interpretation of a text, especially of scripture

What is an imbroglio?
extremely confused, complicated, or embarrassing situation

What is an isohyet?
line on a map connecting points having the same amount of rainfall in a given period

What is an omnium gatherum?
collection of miscellaneous people or things

What is another name for Arnold Schoenberg's twelve-tone technique?
dodecaphony

What is Australia's highest mountain?
Mount Kosciuszko

What is Australia's national anthem, composed by P. D. McCormick circa 1878? It replaced ``God Save the Queen'' in 1984.
``Advance Australia fair''

What is Australia's patriotic slogan/motto?
``Advance Australia''

What is bisque?
rich shellfish soup typically made from lobster

What is bremsstrahlung?
electromagnetic radiation produced by the acceleration or especially the deceleration of a charged particle after passing through the electric and magnetic fields of a nucleus

What is defined as ``a long, narrow, deep inlet of the sea between high cliffs, as in Norway, typically formed by submergence of a glaciated valley''?
fjord

What ``imaginary line on the earth's surface cutting all meridians at the same angle, used as the standard method of plotting a ship's course on a chart,'' was first studied by Pedro Nunes in 1537?
rhumb line

What is grey matter?
darker tissue of the brain and spinal cord mainly consisting of nerve cell bodies and branching dendrites

What is groupthink?
when a group values harmony and coherence over accurate analysis and critical evaluation

What is haecceity?
the status of being an individual or a particular nature; what makes something to be an ultimate reality different from any other

What is halitosis?
bad breath

What is Harvard University's motto?
Veritas

What is Haydn's Symphony no. 45 in F-sharp minor also known as?
Farewell

What is incarnadine?
bright crimson or pinkish-red colour

What is katharevousa?
heavily archaized form of modern Greek used in traditional literary writing, as opposed to the form which is spoken and used in everyday writing

What is known as the king of all cheeses?
Parmigiano-Reggiano

What is Leonardo da Vinci's earliest complete work?
Annunciation

What is Levinthal's paradox?
since there are many different possible conformations of any protein, it would not be possible to determine the native conformation of that protein in a feasible amount of time

What is lox?
fillet of brined salmon; liquid oxygen

What is Mendelssohn's Symphony no. 3 nicknamed?
Scottish

What is Modest Mussorgsky's only completed opera?
Boris Godunov

What is Mozart's Symphony no. 35 nicknamed?
Haffner

What is Nash equilibrium?
stable state of a system involving the interaction of different participants, in which no participant can gain by a unilateral change of strategy if the strategies of the others remain unchanged

What is obeisance?
deferential respect

What is ontogenesis?
the development of an individual organism or anatomical or behavioural feature from the earliest stage to maturity

What is pad kee mao?
southeast Asian dish of stir-fried rice noodles, vegetables, and meat, seafood, or tofu, served with a spicy sauce; also called drunken noodles

What is palingenesis?
the exact reproduction of ancestral characteristics in ontogenesis

What is petrichor?
pleasant smell that frequently accompanies the first rain after a long period of warm, dry weather

What is Puccini's trilogy of one-act operas entitled?
Il trittico

What is respondeat superior?
the legal doctrine according to which an employer is responsible for the actions of its employees performed during the course of their employment (that the master must answer)

What is Rome's largest triumphal arch?
Arch of Constantine

What is Rome's oldest university?
Sapienza University of Rome (1302)

What is schadenfreude?
pleasure derived by someone from another person's misfortune

What is Sweden's largest island?
Gotland

What is the abbreviation found on Rome's coat of arms?
SPQR (Senatus Populusque Romanus)

What is the address of the White House?
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, Washington, DC

What is the Age of Aquarius?
astrological age which is about to begin, marked by the precession of the vernal equinox into Aquarius, believed by some to herald worldwide peace and harmony

What is the allantois?
the fetal membrane lying below the chorion in many vertebrates, formed as an outgrowth of the embryo's gut; forms part of the placenta in eutherian mammals

What is the Allerød?
the second climatic stage of the late-glacial period in northern Europe, between the two Dryas stages (about 12,000 to 10,800 years ago), an interlude of warmer weather marked by the spread of birch

What is the America's Cup?
international yacht race

What is the assembly of cardinals for the election of a pope called?
conclave

What is the basic monetary unit of Afghanistan?
afghani

What is the basic monetary unit of Belgium, Switzerland, and several other countries?
franc

What is the basic monetary unit of Japan?
yen

What is the basic monetary unit of Nigeria?
naira

What is the basic monetary unit of South Africa?
rand

What is the basic monetary unit of Turkey?
lira

What is the biological term for an organism with radial symmetry?
actinomorphic

What is the brightest star in the constellation Aquila?
Altair

What orange giant is the fourth brightest star in the sky and the brightest in the northern-hemisphere constellation Boötes?
Arcturus

What is the capital city of Angola?
Luanda

What is the capital city of Antigua and Barbuda?
St. John's

What is the capital city of Armenia?
Yerevan

What is the capital city of Azerbaijan?
Baku

What is the capital city of Barbados?
Bridgetown

What is the capital city of Benin?
Porto-Novo

What is the capital city of Botswana?
Gaborone

What is the capital city of Burundi?
Gitega

What is the capital city of Cabo Verde?
Praia

What is the capital city of Central African Republic?
Bangui

What is the capital city of Comoros?
Moroni

What is the capital city of Crete?
Heraklion

What is the capital city of Dominica?
Roseau

What is the capital city of Equatorial Guinea?
Malabo

What is the capital city of Eritrea?
Asmara

What is the capital city of Eswatini?
Mbabane

What is the capital city of Gabon?
Libreville

What is the capital city of Ghana?
Accra

What is the capital city of Grenada?
St. George's

What is the capital city of Guinea-Bissau?
Bissau

What is the capital city of Guinea?
Conakry

What is the capital city of Guyana?
Georgetown

What is the capital city of Kazakhstan?
Astana/Nur-Sultan

What is the capital city of Kiribati?
Tarawa

What is the capital city of Kosovo?
Pristina

What is the capital city of Kyrgyzstan?
Bishkek

What is the capital city of Laos?
Vientiane

What is the capital city of Lesotho?
Maseru

What is the capital city of Liberia?
Monrovia

What is the capital city of Malawi?
Lilongwe

What is the capital city of Maldives?
Malé

What is the capital city of Mali?
Bamako

What is the capital city of Mauritania?
Nouakchott

What is the capital city of Mauritius?
Port Louis

What is the capital city of Micronesia?
Palikir

What is the capital city of Moldova?
Chișinău

What is the capital city of Montenegro?
Podgorica

What is the capital city of Mozambique?
Maputo

What is the capital city of Niger?
Niamey

What is the capital city of North Macedonia?
Skopje

What is the capital city of Palau?
Ngerulmud

What is the capital city of Rwanda?
Kigali

What is the capital city of Samoa?
Apia

What is the capital city of Senegal?
Dakar

What is the capital city of Seychelles?
Victoria

What is the capital city of Sierra Leone?
Freetown

What is the capital city of Solomon Islands?
Honiara

What is the capital city of St. Kitts and Nevis?
Basseterre

What is the capital city of St. Lucia?
Castries

What is the capital city of St. Vincent and the Grenadines?
Kingstown

What is the capital city of Tajikistan?
Dushanbe

What is the capital city of Tanzania?
Dodoma/Dar es Salaam

What is the capital city of The Gambia?
Banjul

What is the capital city of the Marshall Islands?
Majuro

What is the capital city of Togo?
Lomé

What is the capital city of Turkmenistan?
Ashgabat

What is the capital city of Uzbekistan?
Tashkent

What is the capital city of Vanuatu?
Port Vila

What is the capital of Veracruz, Mexico?
Jalapa

What is the discriminant of the elliptic curve $y^2 = x^3 + ax + b$?
$$-16(4a^3 + 27b^2)$$

Of what is the fiery lake composed in the book of Revelation?
burning sulphur (19.20)

What is the flag carrier of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden?
Scandinavian Airlines

What is the flag carrier of Germany?
Lufthansa

What is the flag carrier of Greece?
Aegean Airlines

What is the flag carrier of Hong Kong?
Cathay Pacific

What is the flag carrier of Indonesia?
Garuda Indonesia

What is the flag carrier of Ireland?
Aer Lingus

What is the flag carrier of Israel?
El Al

What is the flag carrier of Italy?
Alitalia

What is the flag carrier of Russia?
Aeroflot

What is the flag carrier of the Netherlands?
KLM

What is the Gaelic name for Scotland?
Alba

What is the Galatea effect?
phenomenon where high expectations lead to a high level of performance

What is the Haber--Bosch process?
the industrial process for producing ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen using an iron catalyst at high temperature and pressure

What is the haftarah?
series of selections from the books of Nevi'im publicly read in synagogue as part of Jewish practice

What is the highest mountain in Colorado?
Mt. Elbert

What is the hip socket called?
acetabulum/cotyloid cavity

What is the imaginary line on the earth's surface connecting the north and south magnetic poles and passing through those points where there is no magnetic declination and a freely suspended magnetic needle indicates true north?
agonic line

What is the Indian system of dividing society into hereditary groups whose members interacted primarily within the group and especially married within the group?
caste system

What is the Jewish New Year festival held on the first or second day of Tishri and marked by the blowing of the shofar?
Rosh Hashanah

What is the largest island in the contiguous US?
Long Island

What is the largest island of Svalbard?
Spitsbergen

What is the largest Japanese island?
Honshu

What is the largest moon of Neptune?
Triton

What is the largest moon of Pluto?
Charon

What is the largest Philippine island?
Luzon

What is the largest uninhabited island in the world?
Devon Island

When is the Latin ``ad nauseam'' used?
to sickness

What is the longest Shakespearean play?
Hamlet

What is the lowest point in Egypt?
Qattara Depression

What is the middle part of a classical entablature called?
frieze

What is the most southerly point of Africa?
Cape Agulhas

What is the name given to a Japanese unframed painting made on paper or silk and displayed as a wall hanging?
kakemono

What is the name given to a university professor who has, or originally had, royal patronage or appointment?
Regius Professor

What is the name given to the first five books of the Hebrew Bible?
Torah

What is the name of the lowest octave of the clarinet's range?
chalumeau

What is the name of the principal deity of Shinto: the sun goddess, ancestor of Jimmu, and founder of the imperial dynasty?
Amaterasu

What is the name of the principal island of Denmark?
Zealand

What is the national motto of Belgium?
eendracht maakt macht `unity makes strength'

What is the national motto of Brazil?
ordem e progresso `order and progress'

What is the national motto of Canada?
a mari usque ad mare `from sea to sea'

What is the national motto of Chile?
por la razón o la fuerza `through reason or by force'

What is the national motto of France?
liberté, égalité, fraternité `liberty, equality, fraternity'

What is the national motto of Greece?
ελευθερία ή θάνατος `freedom or death'

What is the national motto of India?
satyameva jayate `truth alone triumphs'

What is the national motto of Indonesia?
bhinneka tunggal ika `unity in diversity'

What is the national motto of Luxembourg?
mir wëlle bleiwe wat mir sinn `we wish to remain what we are'

What is the national motto of Mexico?
la patria es primero `the homeland is first'

What is the national motto of Spain?
plus ultra `further beyond'

What is the national motto of Switzerland?
unus pro omnibus, omnes pro uno `one for all, all for one'

What is the national motto of the Czech Republic?
pravda vítězí `truth prevails'

What is the national motto of the Netherlands?
je maintiendrai `I will maintain'

What is the national motto of the United States?
in God we trust

What is the national sport of Turkey?
oil wrestling

What is the ninth-brightest star in the sky and the brightest in the constellation Eridanus, visible only in the southern hemisphere?
Achernar

What is the official aircraft of the President of the United States called?
Air Force One

What is the only American state pronounced with one syllable?
Maine

What is the outermost layer of the wall of a blood vessel called?
tunica externa/tunica adventitia

What is the Pakistan-Afghanistan border called?
Durand Line

What is the Peltier effect?
heat is given out or absorbed when an electric current passes across a junction between two materials

What is the rate at which atmospheric temperature decreases with increasing altitude in conditions of thermal equilibrium?
adiabatic lapse rate

What is the second largest island of Svalbard?
Nordaustlandet

What is the shape of each face on a dodecahedron?
pentagon

What is the shortest book in the Bible?
Obadiah

What is the SI base unit of (thermodynamic) temperature?
kelvin

What is the SI base unit of amount of substance?
mole

What is the SI base unit of electric current?
ampere

What is the SI base unit of length?
metre

What is the SI base unit of luminous intensity?
candela

What is the SI base unit of mass?
kilogram

What is the SI base unit of time?
second

What is the SI unit of capacitance?
farad (F)

What is the SI unit of electric charge?
coulomb (C)

What is the SI unit of electrical conductance?
siemens (S)

What is the SI unit of electrical potential difference (electromotive force)?
volt (V)

What is the SI unit of energy?
joule (J)

What is the SI unit of force?
newton (N)

What is the SI unit of frequency?
hertz (Hz)

What is the SI unit of inductance?
henry (H)

What is the SI unit of luminous flux?
lumen (lm)

What is the SI unit of magnetic flux density?
tesla (T)

What is the SI unit of magnetic flux?
weber (Wb)

What is the SI unit of power?
watt (W)

What is the SI unit of pressure?
pascal (Pa)

What is the SI unit of radioactivity?
becquerel (Bq)

What is the SI unit of resistance (impedance, reactance)?
ohm (Ω)

What is the state capital of Alabama?
Montgomery

What is the state capital of Alaska?
Juneau

What is the state capital of Arizona?
Phoenix

What is the state capital of Arkansas?
Little Rock

What is the state capital of California?
Sacramento

What is the state capital of Colorado?
Denver

What is the state capital of Connecticut?
Hartford

What is the state capital of Delaware?
Dover

What is the state capital of Florida?
Tallahassee

What is the state capital of Georgia?
Atlanta

What is the state capital of Hawaii?
Honolulu

What is the state capital of Idaho?
Boise

What is the state capital of Illinois?
Springfield

What is the state capital of Indiana?
Indianapolis

What is the state capital of Iowa?
Des Moines

What is the state capital of Kansas?
Topeka

What is the state capital of Kentucky?
Frankfort

What is the state capital of Louisiana?
Baton Rouge

What is the state capital of Maine?
Augusta

What is the state capital of Maryland?
Annapolis

What is the state capital of Massachusetts?
Boston

What is the state capital of Michigan?
Lansing

What is the state capital of Minnesota?
St. Paul

What is the state capital of Mississippi?
Jackson

What is the state capital of Missouri?
Jefferson City

What is the state capital of Montana?
Helena

What is the state capital of Nebraska?
Lincoln

What is the state capital of Nevada?
Carson City

What is the state capital of New Hampshire?
Concord

What is the state capital of New Jersey?
Trenton

What is the state capital of New Mexico?
Santa Fe

What is the state capital of New York?
Albany

What is the state capital of North Carolina?
Raleigh

What is the state capital of North Dakota?
Bismarck

What is the state capital of Ohio?
Columbus

What is the state capital of Oklahoma?
Oklahoma City

What is the state capital of Oregon?
Salem

What is the state capital of Pennsylvania?
Harrisburg

What is the state capital of Rhode Island?
Providence

What is the state capital of South Carolina?
Columbia

What is the state capital of South Dakota?
Pierre

What is the state capital of Tennessee?
Nashville

What is the state capital of Texas?
Austin

What is the state capital of Utah?
Salt Lake City

What is the state capital of Vermont?
Montpelier

What is the state capital of Virginia?
Richmond

What is the state capital of Washington?
Olympia

What is the state capital of West Virginia?
Charleston

What is the state capital of Wisconsin?
Madison

What is the state capital of Wyoming?
Cheyenne

What is the term for a swastika in its clockwise form as a Nazi symbol?
Hakenkreuz

What is the three-dimensional analogue of a parallelogram?
parallelepiped

What is the unicameral legislative assembly of Iceland called?
Althing

What is the University of Cambridge's motto?
hinc lucem et pocula sacra `from this place, we gain enlightenment and precious knowledge'

What is the University of Oxford's motto?
Dominus illuminatio mea `the Lord is my light'

What is the world's largest fluvial island?
Marajó

What is the world's second largest fluvial island and the largest island surrounded by fresh water?
Bananal

What is the diacritic mark ˇ called?
háček

What is tintinnabulation?
ringing or tinkling sound

What island is the largest of the Aleutian Islands and home to one of the ten most active volcanos in the world: Mt. Shishaldin?
Unimak Island

What island is the third-largest in the world and is politically divided into Malaysia, Brunei, and Indonesia?
Borneo

What island is the world's largest and forms part of the Danish Realm?
Greenland

What island, lying in the Arctic Ocean, between the Chukchi Sea and East Siberian Sea, is suspected to be the last place on earth where mammoths lived?
Wrangel Island

What island, the largest of the Ryukyu Islands, is the smallest and least populated of Japan's five islands?
Okinawa Island

What island, the northernmost island of the Novaya Zemlya archipelago, is the second largest in Russia?
Severny Island

What Italian family had two popes: Calixtus III and Alexander VI, who presided during a time of great prosperity for his fellow family members?
Borgia

What Italian poet of the romantic epic Orlando Furioso modelled his seven Satires after Horace and spent most of his career in the Este family's service?
Ludovico Ariosto

What Italian Renaissance humanist author published Della Pittura, a treatise on painting, in 1435?
Leon Battista Alberti

What Japanese admiral was responsible for planning the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor (1941)?
Isoroku Yamamoto

What Japanese form of self-defence and grappling martial art, meaning ``way of adapting the spirit'' in Japanese, uses locks, holds, throws, and the opponent's movements?
aikido

What Jersey golfer has won the most Open Championships?
Harry Vardon

What Jordanian king (1946--51) was emir of Transjordan from 1921 and became king of Jordan on its independence?
Abdullah ibn Hussein

What judge and prophet built an altar to the Lord at Ramah?
Samuel (1 Sam. 7.17)

What judge built an altar and called it ``The Lord is peace''?
Gideon (Judg. 6.24)

What judge's parents saw an angel going up to heaven in the flames on the altar?
Samson's (Judg. 13.20)

What kind of cells wrap around the axon of a neuron to form a myelin sheath?
Schwann cells

What kind of clinometer consists of a sighting tube, spirit level, and graduated scale?
Abney level

What kind of stone was, according to the Law, not supposed to be used in making an altar?
cut stones (Exod. 20.25)

What king issued an order allowing the Jews to rebuild the temple in Jerusalem?
Darius (Ezra 6.1--12)

What king of Israel built a Baal altar in Samaria to please his pagan wife?
Ahab (1 Kings 16.32)

What king of Israel changed the religious institutions of the country by building an altar at Bethel?
Jeroboam (1 Kings 12.32)

What king of Judah tore down Jeroboam's altar at Bethel and pounded the stones into dust?
Josiah (2 Kings 23.15)

What king of the Khmer Empire built Angkor Wat circa 1150?
King Suryavarman II

What king of the Visigoths (395--410) invaded Italy in 408 and captured Rome in 410?
Alaric

What king tricked the followers of Baal by gathering them in Baal's temple and then slaughtering them?
Jehu of Israel (2 Kings 10.18--27)

What king was told to build an altar in a threshing place?
David (2 Sam. 24.18)

What knee-length coat buttoned in front is worn by men from South Asia?
achkan

What lake of northwest Russia is the second-largest in Europe and drained by the Svir River?
Lake Onega

What landform comes in phreatic and Strombolian varieties?
volcano

What language was the official language of the Incan Empire and is still spoken today in Peru?
Quechua

What large, shallow sea enclosed on three sides by northern Australia and bounded on the north by the Arafura Sea was first visited by Wilhelm Janszoon in 1605-06?
Gulf of Carpentaria

What largest and most populous island of Greece bounds the southern border of the Aegean Sea?
Crete

What largest port of Turkey has played a key role in shipping for centuries and has access to the Sea of Marmara, the Golden Horn, and the Black Sea?
Ambarlı

What law states that the pressure and volume of a gas sample at constant temperature are inversely proportional?
Boyle's law

What leader anointed David as king?
Samuel (1 Sam. 16.12)

What Lebanese prime minister was assassinated in June 1987?
Rashid Karami

What Lebanese Shiite Muslim movement/political party was founded as the ``movement of the dispossessed'' and means ``hope'' in Arabic?
Amal

What Leonardo da Vinci drawing depicts a man in two superimposed positions with his arms and legs apart and inscribed in a circle and square?
Vitruvian man (Italian: L'uomo vitruviano)

What lesser Jewish festival commemorates the rededication of the temple by the Maccabees after its desecration by the Syrians and lasts eight days from the 25th day of Kislev?
Chanukah

What lesser Jewish festival held on the 14th or 15th day of Adar commemorates the defeat of Haman's plot to massacre the Jews as written in the book of Esther?
Purim

What line of shoals lying between Sri Lanka and Tamil Nadu separates the Palk Strait from the Gulf of Mannar?
Adam's Bridge

What literary academy is responsible for the standard form of French and compiling and revising a definitive dictionary of French?
l'Académie française

What literary and artistic movement that flourished in 1880s England rejected the notion that art should have a social or moral purpose and included Oscar Wilde, Max Beerbohm, Aubrey Beardsley, and others associated with the journal The yellow book?
Aesthetic Movement

What lobe of the brain is the rearmost in each cerebral hemisphere?
occipital lobe

What lobes of the brain lie beneath the temples, including areas concerned with the understanding of speech?
temporal lobes

What logical fallacy assumes that if something occurred after something else it was caused by that thing?
post hoc ergo propter hoc

What long valveless wooden wind instrument is played like a horn and used for signalling in the Alps?
alpenhorn

What longest-lasting dynasty had no centralized government and was one of the warring states?
Zhou

What magnificent Haydn oratorio (Hob. XXI:2) begins with a vivid orchestral depiction of the chaos from which the world was formed?
Die Schöpfung `The Creation'

What major Jewish festival commemorates the liberation of the Israelites from Egyptian slavery and lasts either seven or eight days from the 15th day of Nisan?
Passover

What major Jewish festival held on either the 5th or 6th of Sivan, 50 days after the second day of Passover, commemorates the giving of the Law?
Shavuot

What major Jewish festival, beginning on the 15th day of Tishri, sometimes called the ``Feast of Tabernacles,'' commemorates the sheltering of the Israelites in the wilderness?
Sukkot

What major port and oil-refining centre on an island of the same name borders the Shatt al-Arab?
Abadan

What marginal sea of the Atlantic separates the Labrador Peninsula and Greenland?
Labrador Sea

What marginal sea of the northeastern Indian Ocean is bounded by the coastlines of Myanmar and Thailand to the north and east, Breueh Island to the south, and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands to the west?
Andaman Sea

What marginal sea of the south Pacific Ocean contains the world's most vast reef system?
Coral Sea

What mass of enlarged lymphatic tissue between the back of the nose and throat often hinders speaking and breathing in young children?
adenoids

What mass of grey matter lying between the cerebral hemispheres on either side of the third ventricle relays sensory information and acts as a centre for pain perception?
thalamus

What massive Rembrandt painting, located in the Rijksmuseum, displays effective tenebrism and depicts the eponymous company moving out led by Captain Frans Banninck Cocq?
The night watch (Dutch: De Nachtwacht)

What material mainly produced by way of BOS today is a construction alloy of iron and carbon?
steel (basic oxygen steelmaking)

What material, also the name of a Verdi opera, consists of a mesh of small holes, used in cross-stitch embroidery?
aida

What mathematician introduced the idea of the oracle machine in his doctoral dissertation Systems of logic based on ordinals, penned the paper Computing machinery and intelligence, and is the eponym of a prestigious computer science award?
Alan Turing

What medieval form of torture involved heavy weights pressing the body?
peine forte et dure

What Mediterranean island did Napoleon Bonaparte conquer while on his way to Egypt in 1798?
Malta

What mediterranean sea in Western Asia is an extension of the Indian Ocean through the Strait of Hormuz that lies between Iran to the northeast and the Arabian Peninsula to the southwest?
Persian Gulf

What Mendelssohn symphony makes use of the Martin Luther hymn ``A mighty fortress is our God'' based on Psalm 46?
Reformation (no. 5)

What Michelangelo fresco covers the whole altar wall of the Sistine Chapel?
The Last Judgement (Italian: Il Giudizio Universale)

What Milanese opera house, inaugurated on 3 August 1778, had Salieri's Europa riconosciuta as its premiere performance?
Teatro alla Scala

What military leader was killed while holding on to the horns of the altar?
Joab (1 Kings 2.28--34)

What minimalist architect designed the Dessau Bauhaus and the Barcelona Pavilion?
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe

What mode is equivalent to the natural minor scale?
Aeolian mode

What monetary unit of Israel is equal to one-hundredth of a shekel?
agora

What month on the Hebrew calendar is preceded by a 30-day intercalary month in leap years and coincides with February and March?
Adar

What month-long Islamic fast begins after a sahūr meal early in the morning and ends with Eid?
Ramadan

What moon of Saturn is larger than Mercury?
Titan

What most common newspaper format is used by newspapers such as The New York Times, The Washington Post, and L'Osservatore Romano?
broadsheet

What mountain is Africa's highest?
Mount Kilimanjaro

What mountain is Europe's highest?
Mt. Elbrus

What mountain is the highest of the Alps?
Mont Blanc

What mountain is the highest of the Andes Mountains and is also the highest in the western hemisphere?
Aconcagua

What mountain is the highest of the Atlas Mountains?
Toubkal

What mountain is the highest of the Karakoram?
K2

What mountain is the United Kingdom's tallest?
Ben Nevis

What mountain pass forms the border between Italy and Austria?
Brenner Pass

What mountain range lies north of Quebec City?
Laurentian Mountains

What mountain range, with its peak at Torre de Cerredo, stretches across northern Spain from the western limit of the Pyrenees to the Galician Massif?
Cantabrian Mountains

What mountain system extends eastwards from Kazakhstan into western Mongolia and northern China?
Altai Mountains

What Mozart opera buffa (K. 588), whose title means ``So do they all'' in Italian, was premiered at the Viennese Burgtheater on 26 January 1790?
Così fan tutte

What musical era encompassed the Neapolitan, Mannheim, and First Viennese Schools?
Classical era

What Muslim movement believes that its founder, Mīrzā Gulām Ahmad (c. 1839--1908), was the Mahdi or promised messiah?
Ahmadiyya

What mythical serpent had a head at each of its ends?
amphisbaena

What name is given to a small nerve cell within the retina with dendrites but no axon?
amacrine cell

What name is given to an Afrikaans-speaking white person in South Africa, especially one descended from the Dutch and Huguenot settlers of the seventeenth century?
Afrikaner

What name is given to each of the 26 member states of the Swiss Confederation?
canton

What name is given to someone with an extreme or irrational fear of entering open or crowded places, leaving their own home, or being in places from which escape is difficult?
agoraphobe

What name is given to the brain's regular electrical activity when conscious and relaxed, consisting of oscillations with frequency 8--13 Hz?
alpha rhythm

What name is given to the New Zealand international men's soccer team?
All Whites

What name is given to the New Zealand international rugby union team?
All Blacks

What name is given to the parts adjoining an organ?
adnexa

What name is given to the radial distance from the pitch circle of a cogwheel or wormwheel to the crests of the teeth or ridges?
addendum

What name is used to refer to a metal or plastic tube fixed tightly round each end of a shoelace?
aglet

What name was given to the Parliament of James I of England because it refused to accede to the king's requests and passed no legislation?
Addled Parliament

What narrow region on the southern coast of Yemen separates the Gulf of Aden from the Arabian peninsula?
Hadhramaut

What natural freshwater lake is on the border of New York and Vermont and is also partially located in Quebec?
Lake Champlain

What Nazi German administrator responsible for administering concentration camps was traced in 1960 by Israeli agents and executed after his trial in Israel?
Adolf Eichmann

What new name did Jesus give to Simon?
Peter (John 1.42)

What New Testament word means ``anointed''?
Christ

What newspaper format is used by Neue Zürcher Zeitung?
Swiss

What newspaper format is used by newspapers such as Le Monde, La Repubblica, Le Temps, and De Morgen?
Berliner

What newspaper format with page size smaller than broadsheet is used by The Boston Herald, The New York Post, The Guardian, and many others?
tabloid

What nickname is sometimes attributed to Socrates?
the gadfly

What Nigerian novelist wrote Things fall apart, No longer at ease, and Arrow of God: collectively called the ``African Trilogy''?
Chinua Achebe

What non-American golfer has won the most major championships?
Gary Player

What Norwegian explorer was the first to navigate the North-West Passage and the first to reach the South Pole?
Roald Amundsen

What Old Testament word means ``anointed''?
Messiah

What Ottoman sultan (1876--1909) deposed after the revolt of the Young Turks was an autocratic ruler?
Abdul Hamid II

What painter created the oil painting The anatomy lesson of Dr. Nicolaes Tulp in 1632?
Rembrandt

What pair of lobes of the brain lies at the top of the head, including areas concerned with the reception and correlation of sensory information?
parietal lobes

What pair of lobes of the brain lies immediately behind the forehead, including areas concerned with behaviour, learning, personality, and voluntary movement?
frontal lobes

What Pakistani theoretical physicist (1926--96) and Nobel laureate (1979) independently developed a unified theory to explain electromagnetic interactions and the weak nuclear force?
Abdus Salam

What part of the Arctic Ocean north of Siberia is bounded by the Barents Sea, Novaya Zemlya, the Severnaya Zemlya archipelago, and Franz Josef Land?
Kara Sea

What part of the brain, located at the back of the skull, coordinates and regulates muscular activity?
cerebellum

What part of the brainstem, responsible for sensory analysis, links the medulla oblongata and the thalamus?
pons Varolii

What part of the Mediterranean Sea bounded by Corsica and Sardinia to the west, Italy to the east, and Sicily to the south derives its name from the Greek name for the Etruscans?
Tyrrhenian Sea

What part of the Southern Ocean contains a gyre of the same name and is defined by the bay formed from the coasts of Coats Land and the Antarctic Peninsula?
Weddell Sea

What part-god king of Uruk crossed the Waters of Death with Urshanabi and restored the cities that a great flood had destroyed in an ancient Babylonian epic?
Gilgamesh

What passage centred on the prime meridian separates Greenland and Svalbard?
Fram Strait

What perfectly square city is described as having walls made of jasper?
the new Jerusalem (Rev. 21.18)

What period of the main Lower Palaeolithic culture in Europe precedes the Mousterian?
Acheulian

What Persian king was considered to be God's anointed one?
Cyrus (Isa. 45.1)

What Persian national epic by Ferdowsi that was dedicated to Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni and completed around 1010 consists of 60,000 rhyming couplets and covers the acceptance of Zoroastrianism, Alexander the Great's invasion, and the Arabian conquest?
Shahnameh

What person was, prior to his fall, anointed by God?
Lucifer, the king of Tyre (Ezek. 28.14)

What phenomenon occurs when a force is applied to the rim of a rotating disc?
gyroscopic precession

What phenomenon, caused by uneven starlight diffraction, makes stars twinkle?
scintillation

What phrase is given to two rhyming iambic pentameter lines of which Alexander Pope was fond?
heroic couplet

What physiologist performed the dog experiment and discovered the process of classical conditioning?
Ivan Pavlov

What plant is endemic to Taiwan and the Ryukyu Islands?
Easter Lily

What Platonic solid has the most faces?
icosahedron

What playwright wrote Tartuffe and Le Misanthrope?
Molière

What playwright wrote The Jew of Malta, Doctor Faustus, Edward the Second, and The massacre at Paris?
Christopher Marlowe

What poem of Dante's Divine comedy describes the protagonist ascending through ten astronomically incorrect spheres, and, when he reaches the Empyrean, St. Bernard places his guide through Purgatory and the rest of Heaven?
Paradiso

What Polish composer (1933--2020) wrote Threnody for the victims of Hiroshima and religious works like the St. Luke Passion and Polish Requiem?
Krzysztof Penderecki

What Polish-born mathematician who held dual American and French citizenship as an adult was named an IBM fellow, joined the faculty of Yale as a Sterling Professor of Mathematical Sciences after retirement, and invented the name ``fractal''?
Benoît Mandelbrot

What pope excommunicated King Henry VIII of England through the bull Cum redemptor noster?
Paul III

What pope excommunicated Martin Luther through the bull Decet Romanum Pontificem?
Leo X

What pope initiated the First Crusade?
Pope Urban II

What pope issued the bull Quo primum, the Apostolic constitution on the Tridentine Mass?
Pius V

What pope promulgated the novus Ordo Missae, also known as the post-Vatican II Mass?
Paul VI

What is Thailand's largest island?
Phuket

What port city is the capital of Fujian province?
Fuzhou

What port city is the capital of Hainan province?
Haikou

What POTUS who was said to have played ``too much football without a helmet'' by Lyndon Johnson acquired a notable position after Spiro Agnew's resignation and served after (and later pardoned) Richard Nixon?
Gerald Ford

What prayer is sung by Jewish people at the opening of the Day of Atonement service on the eve of Yom Kippur?
Kol Nidre

What president of Indonesia (1945--67) led the struggle for independence formally granted in 1949 but lost power after being implicated in the abortive communist coup of 1965?
Achmad Sukarno

What priest anointed Solomon king?
Zadok (1 Kings 1.39)

What principal and most anterior part of the brain, also called the cortex, is composed of four sections and is responsible for the integration of complex sensory and neural functions and the initiation and coordination of voluntary activity in the body?
cerebrum

What projection at the front of the neck is formed by the thyroid cartilage of the larynx?
Adam's apple

What prophet told the priest Pashur that his new name was to be Magor-missabib?
Jeremiah (20.3)

What prophet was told by God to name his son Lo-ammi?
Hosea (1.9)

What protein produced by a fetus and present in amniotic fluid and the mother's bloodstream can be measured to detect some congenital defects like spina bifida and Down's syndrome?
alphafetoprotein

What protein that forms (together with myosin) the contractile filaments of muscle cells is also involved in motion in other types of cells?
actin

What psychologist, credited with founding psychophysics, dealt with experimental, sensation, and perception difference threshold?
Gustav Fechner

What pungent oily liquid with antibacterial properties present in garlic had the chemical formula (C3H5S)2O?
allicin

What RAF rank is above air commodore and below air marshal?
air vice-marshal

What RAF rank is above air marshal and below Marshal of the RAF?
air chief marshal

What RAF rank is above air vice-marshal and below air chief marshal?
air marshal

What RAF rank is above group captain and below air vice-marshal?
air commodore

What railway, opened in 1830, was the first to rely solely on steam-powered trains?
Liverpool and Manchester Railway

What range of mountains in New York State is the source of the Hudson and Mohawk Rivers?
Adirondack Mountains

What rank of sailor in the Royal Navy is above ordinary seaman and below leading seaman?
able seaman

What rebellious son of David sought refuge from Solomon by holding on to the horns of the altar?
Adonijah (1 Kings 1.50)

What red pigment present in madder root and used in dyeing has the chemical formula C14H8O4?
alizarin

What refers to the Chinese characters borrowed from Chinese and incorporated into the Korean language with Korean pronunciation?
Hanja

What region of the forebrain below the thalamus coordinates both the ANS and the activity of the pituitary, controlling body temperature, thirst, hunger, and other homeostatic systems, as well as circadian rhythm?
hypothalamus

What region of the North Atlantic Ocean with calm, blue water is bounded by four currents forming an ocean gyre and has no land boundaries?
Sargasso Sea

What relatively shallow sea separates Timor and Australia?
Timor Sea

What revered judge anointed Saul?
Samuel (1 Sam. 9.16)

What Richard Wagner opera set in Nuremberg is about a pair of young lovers named Walther and Eva and a shoemaker named Hans Sachs?
Die Meistersinger

What rift lake in southern Siberia, whose name comes from the Mongolian ``nature lake,'' is located between Irkutsk Oblast and the Buryat Republic and is the largest freshwater lake by volume?
Lake Baikal

What rival of Alexander Hamilton killed Hamilton in a duel?
Aaron Burr

What river flows through Albany?
Hudson River

What river flows through Rome?
Tiber

What river forms the border between Russia and northeastern China?
Amur River

What river is Africa's second longest?
Congo

What river is Australia's longest?
Murray

What river is China's longest?
Yangtze

What river is China's second longest?
Yellow

What river is formed by the confluence of the Tigris and Euphrates and constitutes the border between Iraq and Iran at its southern end before discharging into the Persian Gulf?
Shatt al-Arab

What river is France's longest?
Loire

What river on which Bangui is located is the largest right-bank tributary of the Congo River?
Ubangi River

What river of central France rises in the Cévennes and flows 410 km northwest to meet the Loire?
Allier

What river of Greek mythology was known as the ``river of woe'' and one of the rivers of Hades?
Acheron

What river of southern Bangladesh is formed by the confluence of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra near Rajbari?
Padma

What river of West Africa, formed in central Ghana flowing into the Gulf of Guinea near the border with Togo, has a dam that created one of the world's largest man-made lakes with the same name?
Volta River

What river on which Ufa is located has its source in the southwestern Ural Mountains?
Belaya

What river, about 2,900 km in length, flows from Tibet through Kashmir and Pakistan to the Arabian Sea?
Indus River

What river, in the Amazon basin, rises in the Andes in southwest Colombia?
Japurá River

What Roman city wall, built from 271--75, superseded the Servian Wall after the city's borders went beyond the wall?
Aurelian Wall

What Roman poet wrote the Eclogues, concerning the pastoral poems of Theocritus; the Georgics, concerning agriculture; and the Aeneid, concerning a Trojan hero?
Virgil

What Romanian city and former capital of Transylvania, located north of the Transylvanian Alps, was founded by the Romans in the second century?
Alba Iulia

What Russian composer was also a chemist who received his doctorate for his essay ``On the analogy of arsenical with phosphoric acid''?
Aleksandr Borodin

What Russian krai in southwestern Siberia borders Kazakhstan and has its capital in Barnaul?
Altai

What Russian-born French chess player was world champion from 1927 to 1935 and from 1937 to his death?
Alexander Alekhine

What South African political leader won the Nobel Peace Prize (1960) for his ANC presidency marked by a program of civil disobedience?
Albert John Luthuli

What saint and Doctor of the Church of present-day Algeria (354--430) developed the doctrine of original sin?
St. Augustine of Hippo

What satellite of Jupiter is third closest to the planet, reddish in colour, and heavily cratered?
Amalthea

What Saudi monetary unit equal to one-hundredth of a rial?
halala

What Scottish economist and philosopher (1723-90) is regarded as the founder of modern economics and wrote An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations?
Adam Smith

What Scottish football manager and footballer managed Manchester United (1986--2013) with thirteen Premier League championships, five FA Cups, and two UEFA Champions League titles?
Sir Alex Ferguson

What sculptor spearheaded the carving of Mount Rushmore?
Gutzon Borglum

What sea lying west of the Pacific Ocean overlies the continental shelf between Australia and Indonesian New Guinea and is bordered by the Torres Strait and the Coral Sea to the east, the Gulf of Carpentaria to the south, the Timor Sea to the west, and the Banda and Ceram Seas to the northwest?
Arafura Sea

What sea of the Pacific Ocean is located in the Maluku Islands of Indonesia and surrounded by the Halmahera and Ceram Seas?
Banda Sea

What sea of the western Pacific Ocean and piece of an ancient ocean basin formed about forty-two million years ago is bordered on the north by the Sulu Archipelago, the Sulu Sea and Mindanao Island of the Philippines, the east by the Sangihe Islands chain, the south by Sulawesi's Minahasa Peninsula, and the west by northern Kalimantan in Indonesia?
Celebes Sea

What sea, bounded on the north by Pakistan and Iran, on the west by the Gulf of Aden, Guardafui Channel and the Arabian Peninsula, the southeast by the Laccadive Sea, the southwest by the Somali Sea, and the east by India, has major seaports including Mumbai, Karachi, Kandla, Okha, Gwadar, Chabahar, and Salalah, and has been crossed by many important marine trade routes since the third or second millennium BC?
Arabian Sea

What sea, sometimes considered the northwestern part of the East China Sea and whose innermost bay is the Bohai Sea, separates mainland China and the Korean Peninsula?
Yellow Sea

What second-largest city of Denmark is on the coast of east Jutland?
Aarhus

What section of Antarctica south of the sixtieth parallel between Wilkes Land and King George V Land is under French ownership?
Adélie Land

What sections of Mozart's Requiem were completely composed by Süssmayr?
Sanctus, Benedictus, Agnus Dei

What seminal work on the heliocentric model of Copernicus offered an alternative model to Ptolemy's geocentric model?
De revolutionibus orbium coelestium `On the revolutions of the heavenly spheres'

What series of caves in Maharashtra, India contains Buddhist frescos and sculptures?
Ajanta Caves

What series of treaties (1713--14) ended the War of the Spanish Succession?
Peace of Utrecht

What set of examinations do students take in their final year of secondary school in Germany?
Abiturientenexamen

What shallow, endorheic, and saline lake of Kazakhstan (the fifteenth largest lake in the world) is divided by a strait into two distinct parts: the western freshwater part and the eastern saline part?
Lake Balkhash

What Siberian river, known for the goldfields in its basin, rises in the mountains on the western shore of Lake Baikal and eventually flows into the Laptev Sea?
Lena

What site has a cave with Paleolithic rock paintings, south of Santander in northern Spain, discovered in 1879?
Altamira

What site of two colossal rock-cut temples in southern Egypt was built during the reign of Ramses II in the thirteenth century BC and commemorated him and his first wife, Nefertari?
Abu Simbel

What sixth pair of cranial nerves supplies the muscles concerned with the lateral movement of the eyeballs?
abducens nerves

What solemn religious fast called the Day of Atonement is the last of ten days of penitence?
Yom Kippur

What song did Mahler use in the finale of his Fourth Symphony?
The heavenly life

What South African political party was banned by the South African government from 1960 to 1690 and was successful in South Africa's first democratic elections in 1994, Nelson Mandela becoming president?
ANC (African National Congress)

What South African president lifted the ban on the African National Congress and repealed apartheid laws?
F. W. de Klerk

What South African statesman (prime minister 1978--84) was an authoritarian leader who enforced apartheid but introduced limited reforms and fell from power due to resistance to more radical change?
P. W. Botha

What South Korean city, located at the intersection of the Sea of Japan and the East China Sea, has South Korea's busiest seaport and is South Korea's second-most populous city?
Busan

What southern inlet of the Barents Sea surrounded by Karelia to the west, the Kola Peninsula to the north, and the Kanin Peninsula to the west is wholly under Russian sovereignty?
White Sea

What Spanish conquistador set up a meeting with Incan ruler Atahualpa at Cajamarca, but took him captive and slew his 4,000 unarmed men?
Francisco Pizarro

What Spanish physician, Jewish philosopher, and Rabbinic scholar wrote The Guide for the Perplexed --- a theological work attempting to reconcile Talmudic scripture with Aristotelian philosophy --- and formulated thirteen principles of faith in his commentary on the Mishnah?
Maimonides/Rambam

What Speaker of the House of Commons (2009--19) and MP for Buckingham (1997--2019) noted for his vast vocabulary was the first Speaker since World War II to be elected four times?
(The Right Honourable) John Bercow

What star is the brightest in the constellation Taurus?
Aldebaran

What state in eastern Brazil has the capital Maceió?
Alagoas

What state was the 22nd established (1819)?
Alabama

What statesman (1903-90) was the first prime minister of independent Malaya (1957--63) and Malaysia (1963--70)?
Tunku Abdul Rahman

What statesman (b. 1935) was the first prime minister of the Palestinian Authority from 2003, and in 2005 was elected president, following the death of Yasser Arafat?
Mahmoud Abbas

What statesman was the first Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany (1949--63) and during his term presided over the political and economic transformation of his country?
Konrad Adenauer

What student of Mozart's completed his Requiem?
Franz Xaver Süssmayr

What subsidiary market of the London Stock Exchange that allows small companies to be traded without the expense of a full market is abbreviated AIM?
Alternative Investment Market

What substance was usually used for anointing in Israel?
olive oil

What substance, vital to the flight-or-fight response, is released predominantly from the ends of sympathetic nerve fibres and acts to increase the force of skeletal muscle contraction and the force/rate of heart contraction?
norepinephrine

What subtropical desert of Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, and Angola is the seventh-largest desert in the world?
Kalahari Desert

What suburb of Liverpool hosts the Grand National?
Aintree

What surgical operation removes excess flesh from the abdomen?
abdominoplasty

What Swedish king credited with beginning the Golden Age in Sweden died leading his troops during the Thirty Years' War and laid the foundation of the modern state through his domestic reforms?
Gustavus Adolphus

What Swiss mountain of the Bernese Alps, whose glaciers are among the largest in Europe, rises to 4,195 m and is a UNESCO World Heritage SIte?
Aletschhorn

What Swiss psychiatrist and psychoanalyst who theorized the collective unconscious and the concept of the archetype founded analytical psychology?
Carl Jung

What symphony of Mahler's is in two parts: the first based on Veni Creator Spiritus and the second based on Goethe's Faust?
no. 8 (Symphony of a Thousand)

What symphony of Mahler's uses a minor-key version of Frère Jacques in its slow movement?
the first (Der Titan)

What Tang Dynasty poet/artist is often mentioned alongside Du Fu and Li Po and wrote poems including ``A green stream,'' ``In a retreat among bamboos,'' and ``Bound home to Mount Sung''?
Wang Wei

What Tartini violin sonata was inspired by a dream?
Devil's Trill

What term originally used by Aristotle in Poetics refers to the purification and purgation of emotion?
catharsis

What term used by Plato and Aristotle refers to the perfection and imitation of nature?
mimesis

What test is used to determine the mutagenic activity of chemicals by observing whether they cause mutations in sample bacteria?
Ames test

What text recited at the Seder on the first two nights of the Jewish Passover includes an Exodus narrative?
Haggadah

What three Caribbean islands form the ABC Islands?
Aruba, Bonaire, Curaçao

What three races form the American Triple Crown?
Kentucky Derby, Preakness Stakes, Belmont Stakes

What title is currently granted to a top Shia mujtahid and an expert in Islamic studies such as jurisprudence, Quran reading, and philosophy?
ayatollah

What title is given to the Patriarch of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church?
Abuna

What title is given to the spiritual leader of the Nizari sect of Ismaili Muslims?
Aga Khan

What town hosted the 1994 Winter Olympics?
Lillehammer

What town in southern Turkey is the capital of a province of the same name?
Adana

What toxic synthetic insecticide, now generally banned, has the chemical formula C12H8Cl6 and shares its name with an American astronaut?
aldrin

What trade bloc officially called Southern Common Market was established by the Treaty of Asunción in 1991 and Protocol of Ouro Preto in 1994?
Mercosur

What traditional founder of the Jewish priesthood (Exod. 28.1) was Moses's brother?
Aaron

What transformation of British agriculture in the eighteenth century is characterized by the enclosure of common land and technological innovations such as the seed drill and crop rotation?
Agrarian Revolution

What treatise on politics did Niccolò Machiavelli write in 1513?
The prince

What treaty ended the war between the United States and Great Britain?
Treaty of Paris

What trilogy of tragedies by Aeschylus was performed in Athens in 458 BC?
Oresteia

What Turkish field marshal and statesman founded the Republic of Turkey and was its first president?
Mustafa Kemal Atatürk

What Turkish sea is connected to the Black Sea by the Bosporus and the Aegean Sea by the Dardanelles?
Sea of Marmara

What two functional groups does an amino acid contain?
carboxyl, amino

What two Roman emperors ruled during the lifetime of Jesus?
Augustus, Tiberius

What two Shakespearean plays were written entirely in verse?
Richard II, King John

What type of acid able to form a dative bond with an available electron pair and commonly exemplified by BF3 is an electron pair acceptor?
Lewis acid

What type of OLED diode provides an increased refresh rate, has reduced power consumption, and is suitable for portable electronic devices?
AMOLED (active matrix)

What type of poetic stanza that has eight iambic pentameter lines followed by an alexandrine was used by John Keats in The Eve of St. Agnes?
Spenserian stanza

What United States Supreme Court case established the principle of judicial review in the United States?
Marbury v. Madison

What upper part of the Nile flows through northwestern Uganda between a lake of the same name and the Uganda--South Sudan border?
Albert Nile

What variable star in the constellation Perseus is regarded as the prototype of eclipsing binary stars and shares its name with an early high-level programming language?
Algol

What vast mountainous peninsula in northeast Siberian Russia separates the Sea of Okhotsk from the Bering Sea?
Kamchatka

What vein takes blood from the head and neck to the heart?
jugular vein

What village in north-eastern Germany, on a small island just off the Baltic coast, was the chief site of German rocket research and testing during WWII?
Peenemunde

What viscous liquid is obtained when acetaldehyde dimerizes in dilute alkali or acid and has the chemical formula CH3CH(OH)CH2CHO?
aldol

What Wagnerian concept means ``total work of art'' in German?
Gesamtkunstwerk

What war, initially a religious war between Catholics and Protestants, became a general European political war that was one of the most extensive and most destructive conflicts in European history?
Thirty Years' War

What was an abatis?
defence made of felled trees placed lengthwise over each other with the boughs pointing outwards

What was an aedile?
either of two (later four) Roman magistrates responsible for public buildings and originally for the public games and the supply of corn to the city

What was an agora?
(in ancient Greece) a public open space used for assemblies and markets

What was Astana's former name?
Akmola

What was Benin's former name?
Dahomey

What was Daniel's Chaldean name?
Belteshazzar

What was Hosea told to name his daughter?
Lo-ruhamah (Hos. 1.6)

What was İskenderun's former name?
Alexandretta

What was Rembrandt's entire name?
Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn

What was the capital of Kazakhstan (1929--97)?
Almaty

What was the earliest known printed book made with metal movable type, printed in Korea?
Jikji

What was the first man-made satellite called? It launched in 1957.
Sputnik 1

What was the first sovereign nation to grant women suffrage?
Australia

What was the first state in the United States to grant full voting rights to women?
Colorado

What was the former name for Algeria?
Numidia

What was the former name for Ankara?
Angora

What was the former name for Burkina Faso?
Upper Volta

What was the former name for Ethiopia?
Abyssinia

What was the former name for Gaziantep?
Aintab

What was the former name for Ho Chi Minh City?
Saigon

What was the former name for Moldova?
Moldavia

What was the former name for Namibia?
South West Africa

What was the former name for Oslo (1624--1924)?
Christiania

What was the former name for Sri Lanka?
Ceylon

What was the former name for Taiwan?
Formosa

What was the former name for Thailand?
Siam

What was the former name for the Democratic Republic of the Congo?
Zaire

What was the former name for Zambia?
Northern Rhodesia

What was the former name for Zimbabwe?
Southern Rhodesia

What was the fourth name occasionally given as an honour to an ancient Roman citizen?
agnomen

What was the motto of the Roman Empire?
senatus populusque Romanus `the senate and people of Rome'

What was the motto of the Soviet Union?
Пролетарии всех стран, соединяйтесь! `proletarians of all nations, unite'

What was the name of Alexander the Great's favourite horse?
Bucephalus

What was the name of the oath in which members of the French Third Estate vowed ``not to separate and to reassemble wherever circumstances require, until the Constitution of the kingdom is established'' on 20 June 1789?
Tennis Court Oath

What was the real name of the Red Baron?
Manfred von Richthofen

What was the Sumerian form of writing called? This name describes wedge-shaped marks made by a stylus.
cuneiform

What water body separates Madagascar from continental Africa?
Mozambique Channel

What were the names of the Magi?
Casper, Balthasar, Melchior

What were two former names for St. Petersburg?
Petrograd, Leningrad

What white crystalline compound used as a low-calorie artificial sweetener has chemical formula C4H5NO4S?
acesulfame

What word derived from the name of a Napoleonic soldier who was known for his loud-mouthed patriotism mostly refers to the denigration of one sex by another?
chauvinism

What word describes the loss of the ability to perform simple calculations typically resulting from disease or injury of the parietal lobe of the brain?
acalculia

What word means ``of or relating to summer''?
estival

What words mean ``indicative of or occurring in the winter''?
brumal, hiemal

What work of Newton covers Newton's laws of motion, classical mechanics, and Newton's law of universal gravitation?
Principia

What St. Francis of Assisi work was written in an Umbrian dialect of Italian and among the first written works in the Italian language?
Laudes Creaturarum `Canticle of the sun'

What writer who was exiled from Athens after he failed to prevent the Spartans' capture of Amphipolis wrote the History of the Peloponnesian War during his exile in an unprecedented feat of composing an account of a war as its events unfolded?
Thucydides

What writing system used for Semitic languages like Arabic and Hebrew has vowel optionality?
abjad

What year was Albert Einstein's annus mirabilis?
1905

When and where was Arnold Schoenberg born?
13 September 1874 in Vienna, Austria

When and where was Béla Bartók born?
25 March 1881 in Hungary

When and where was Claude Debussy born?
22 August 1862 in Saint-Germain-en-Laye, France

When and where was Dmitri Shostakovich born?
25 September 1906 in St. Petersburg, Russia

When and where was Franz Schubert born?
31 January 1797 in Vienna, Austria

When and where was Frédéric Chopin born?
1 March 1810 in Żelazowa Wola, Poland

When and where was Giuseppe Verdi born?
9 or 10 October 1813 near Busseto, Italy

When and where was Gustav Mahler born?
7 July 1860 in Bohemia

When and where was Igor Stravinsky born?
17 June 1882 in Oranienbaum, Russia

When and where was J. S. Bach born?
31 March 1685 in Eisenach, Germany

When and where was Jean Sibelius born?
8 December 1865 in Hämeenlinna, Finland

When and where was Johannes Brahms born?
7 May 1833 in Hamburg, Germany

When and where was Joseph Haydn born?
31 March 1732 in Rohrau, Austria

When and where was Ludwig van Beethoven born?
17 December 1770 in Bonn, Germany

When and where was Maurice Ravel born?
7 March 1875 in Ciboure, France

When and where was Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky born?
7 May 1840 in Votkinsk, Russia

When and where was Richard Strauss born?
11 June 1864 in Munich, Germany

When and where was Richard Wagner born?
22 May 1813 in Leipzig, Germany

When and where was Robert Schumann born?
8 June 1810 in Zwickau, Germany

When and where was Sergei Prokofiev born?
27 April 1891 in Sontsovka, Ukraine

When and where was Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart born?
27 January 1756 in Salzburg, Austria

When did Alexander die at Babylon?
323 BC

When did Confucius live?
551--479 BC

When did Guglielmo Marconi send his first transatlantic message?
1901

When did Muhammad die?
632

When did Muhammad migrate from Mecca to Medina?
622

When did Parisian revolutionaries storm the Bastille?
14 July 1789

When did Pope Gregory XIII issue the Gregorian calendar?
1582

When did St. Sixtus III become pope?
432

When did the Buddha live?
563--483 BC

When did the United States declare independence?
1776

When did William Shakespeare write Hamlet?
1599--1601

When has Tokyo hosted the Olympics?
1964, 2021

When is All Saints' Day celebrated?
1 November

When is All Souls' Day celebrated?
2 November

When is Michaelmas?
29 September

When is the Assumption of Mary?
15 August

When is the exclamation ``absit omen'' used?
when referring to something undesirable, in the hope that the thing mentioned will not occur

When is the feast of St. Anthony of Padua?
13 June

When is the Feast of St. Stephen?
26 December

When Martin Luther was a Catholic monk, to which religious order did he belong?
Augustinian order

When Samson pulled the building down, how many people had been sitting on the rooftop?
about three thousand (Judg. 16.27)

When was Abraham Lincoln assassinated?
1865

When was John F. Kennedy assassinated?
1963

When was Leonardo da Vinci born?
1452

When was Muhammad born?
570

When was Napoleon named emperor of the French Empire?
1804

When was Pax Romana --- a period of peace in the Roman Empire?
27 BC--180 AD

When was the foundation of Rome?
753 BC

When was the Julian calendar introduced?
46

When was the League of Nations founded?
1920

When was the Roman Republic founded?
509 BC

When was William Shakespeare born?
April 1564

When were the first modern Olympics held?
1896

Where are Leonardo da Vinci's Virgin of the rocks paintings located?
Louvre, National Gallery

Where are the Allegheny Mountains?
eastern USA (Appalachians)

Where are the ruins of Troy?
Turkey

Where did Abraham take Isaac to be sacrificed?
Moriah (Gen. 22)

Where did Jacob and Laban make their covenant?
Gilead (Gen. 31.20--49)

Where did Jesus's transfiguration occur?
Harmon (Matt. 17)

Where did Leonardo da Vinci decease?
Château du Clos Lucé, Amboise, France

Where did Moses see the burning bush?
Horeb (Exod. 3.1)

Where did Noah's ark land?
Ararat (Gen. 8.4)

Where did SARS-CoV-2 originate?
Wuhan

Where did the men of Judah gather to anoint David as their king?
Hebron (2 Sam. 2.4)

Where did Vasco da Gama land after discovering the sea route to India?
Calicut

Where does the Chancellor of the Exchequer (the Second Lord of the Treasury) of the UK reside?
11 Downing Street, London

Where does the Prime Minister (the First Lord of the Treasury) of the UK reside?
10 Downing Street, London

Where does the Prime Minister of Canada reside?
24 Sussex Drive, Ottawa

Where is Ludwig van Beethoven's Fidelio set?
Seville

Where is the world's largest and oldest crater located?
Vredefort, South Africa

Where is Vincent van Gogh's The starry night located?
MoMA

Where was Abram born?
Ur

Where was Achaea?
on the north coast of the Peloponnese

Where was Claudio Monteverdi born?
Cremona

Where was the Rosetta Stone found?
Egypt

Which goddess had a notorious temple at Ephesus?
Diana/Artemis (Acts 19.27--28)

Which of the quark flavours is the most massive?
top

Which of the twelve tribes caused civil war when they built a magnificent altar on the banks of the Jordan?
Reuben, Gad, and half of Manasseh (Josh. 22.1)

Which two characters from Moby Dick have biblical names?
Ahab, Ishmael

Who abdicated to Emperor Meiji, ending shogun rule in Japan in 1867?
Tokugawa Yoshinobu

Who almost sacrificed his son on an altar but was stopped by an angel?
Abraham (Gen. 22.9)

Who anointed a stone and dedicated it to God?
Jacob (Gen. 28.18)

Who anointed the tabernacle with oil?
Moses (Exod. 40.9)

Who asked Elisha's forgiveness for worshipping in the temple of the god Rimmon?
Naaman the Syrian (2 Kings 5.18)

Who assumed responsibility for the burial of Jesus?
Joseph of Arimathea (John 19.38--42)

Who authored The communist manifesto?
Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels

Who became the first King of the Bourbon dynasty after converting to Catholicism?
Henry IV

Who built a city called Enoch east of Eden?
Cain (Gen. 4.17)

Who built an altar and called it ``The Lord is my banner''?
Moses (Exod. 17.15)

Who built ancient Babylon?
Nimrod (Gen. 10.8--10)

Who built the first altar?
Noah (Gen. 8.20)

Who built the first temple in Jerusalem?
Solomon (1 Kings 6)

Who carried away furnishings from the Jerusalem temple and put them in the temple at Babylon?
Nebuchadnezzar (2 Chron. 36.7)

Who completed the dome of the Florence cathedral?
Filippo Brunelleschi

Who composed Myrthen, a song cycle of 26 songs?
Robert Schumann

Who composed Scythian Suite?
Prokofiev

Who composed Symphony of Psalms?
Igor Stravinsky

Who composed the Missa in Angustiis or Nelson Mass?
F. J. Haydn

Who composed The Sorcerer's Apprentice?
Paul Dukas

Who developed C?
Dennis Ritchie

Who developed C++?
Bjarne Stroustrup

Who developed Java?
James Gosling

Who developed Python?
Guido van Rossum

Who developed the polio vaccine?
Jonas Salk

Who died after falling out of a window during Paul's sermon?
Eutychus (Acts 20.9)

Who established Bauhaus?
Walter Gropius

Who founded the Catholic Church in Hungary?
St. Stephen I

Who founded the Théâtre des Champs-Élysées?
Gabriel Astruc

Who had a miraculous well opened up for him after he worked up a thirst in battle?
Samson (Judg. 15.18--20)

Who had a vision of the Lord standing beside the altar?
Amos (9.1)

Who had an Assyrian-style altar made for the Jerusalem temple?
King Ahaz (2 Kings 16.10--17)

Who has won the most Australian Open titles?
Novak Djokovic

Who has won the most French Open titles?
Rafael Nadal

Who has won the most Wimbledon titles?
Roger Federer

Who improved Morse code in 1840?
Alfred Vail

Who invented movable type printing in 1040?
Bi Sheng

Who invented the world wide web?
Sir Tim Berners-Lee

Who is the first Christian martyr?
St. Stephen (Acts 7.54--8.2)

Who is the Vedic god of fire: the priest of the gods and the god of the priests?
Agni

Who led a revolt that both deposed Emperor Romulus Augustulus and marked the end of the Western Roman Empire?
Flavius Odoacer

Who lost his strength when his hair was cut?
Samson

Who managed England to its World Cup victory in 1966?
Sir Alf Ramsey

Who painted The great wave off Kanagawa?
Hokusai

Who penned Of mice and men and East of Eden?
John Steinbeck

Who proved Fermat's Last Theorem?
Sir Andrew John Wiles

Who proved the Poincaré conjecture with the help of Richard Hamilton?
Grigori Perelman

Who received a vision of the Jerusalem temple while he was in exile in Babylon?
Ezekiel (40--42)

Who ruled the Ottoman Empire from 1520 to 1566?
Suleiman the Magnificent

Who said, ``Children today are tyrants. They contradict their parents, gobble their food, and tyrannize their teachers''?
Socrates

Who said, ``Cowards die many times before their deaths. / The valiant never taste of death but once''?
Julius Caesar from Shakespeare's Julius Caesar

Who said, ``If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him''?
Voltaire

Who said, ``To err is human, to forgive divine''?
Alexander Pope

Who served as the first Prime Minister and President of Bangladesh?
Mujibur Rahman

Who shared the 1945 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine with Fleming for establishing penicillin's therapeutic use as an antibiotic?
Howard Florey, Ernst Chain

Who stored Goliath's armour in his tent?
David (1 Sam. 17.54)

Who taxed the Israelites in order to pay off Pul, the king of Assyria?
King Menahem (2 Kings 15.19--20)

Who took bones out of tombs and burned them on an altar to defile it?
Josiah (2 Kings 23.16)

Who used the cowpox virus to create the first vaccine for smallpox?
Edward Jenner

Who was anointed by the Holy Spirit?
Jesus (Matt. 3.16)

Who was Bathsheba's first husband?
Uriah

Who was Isaiah's father?
Amoz

Who was Moses's father-in-law?
Jethro

Who was Queen of England for only nine days?
Lady Jane Grey

Who was taken to the highest point of the Jerusalem temple?
Jesus (Matt. 4.5)

Who was the first American to win a Nobel Prize in a science?
Albert Abraham Michelson (1907, physics)

Who was the first American to win a Nobel Prize?
Theodore Roosevelt (1906)

Who was the first President of Afghanistan?
Mohammed Daoud Khan

Who was the first Prime Minister of Singapore?
Lee Kuan Yew

Who was the first to circumnavigate the globe?
Ferdinand Magellan

Who was the first woman in space?
Valentina Tereshkova

Who was the first woman to fly across the Atlantic solo?
Amelia Earhart

Who was told by an angel that his son was to be named John?
Zechariah (Luke 1.13)

Who was told by God to name his son Maher-shalal-hash-baz?
Isaiah (8.3)

Who was told in a vision to measure the temple in Jerusalem?
John (Rev. 11.1--2)

Who was told to name his firstborn son Jezreel?
Hosea (1.4)

Who was told to name his son Solomon?
David (1 Chron. 22.9)

Who were Abraham's brothers?
Nahor, Haran

Who were Isaac's sons?
Esau, Jacob

Who were the first two people to summit Mt. Everest?
Edmund Hillary, Tenzing Norgay

Who were the three Hebrew men thrown into a furnace by Nebuchadnezzar?
Hananiah, Mishael, Azariah (Dan. 3)

Who were the Three Tenors?
Plácido Domingo, José Carreras, Luciano Pavarotti

Who wrote A clockwork orange?
Anthony Burgess

Who wrote Oedipus Rex?
Sophocles

Who wrote the Almagest --- an influential treatise on astronomy?
Ptolemy

Who wrote The catcher in the rye?
J. D. Salinger

Who wrote The cherry orchard and The seagull?
Anton Chekhov

Who wrote the Decameron between 1348 and 1358, a work containing a hundred tales supposedly told in ten days by a party of ten young people who had fled from the Black Death in Florence?
Giovanni Boccaccio

Who wrote The glass menagerie and A streetcar named desire?
Tennessee Williams

Who wrote The godfather?
Mario Puzo

Who wrote The interior castle?
St. Teresa of Ávila

Who wrote The three musketeers and The count of Monte Cristo?
Alexandre Dumas

Who wrote To kill a mockingbird?
Harper Lee

Who wrote Who's afraid of Virginia Woolf?
Edward Albee

Who, according to James, should anoint the sick believer with oil?
the church elders (Jas. 5.14)

Whom did Jesus say he would make into fishers of men?
Peter, Andrew (Mark 1.17)

Whom did Moses anoint with the blood of a ram?
Aaron and his sons (Lev. 8.23)

Whom did Octavian defeat at the Battle of Actium (31 BC)?
Marc Antony, Cleopatra

Whom did Solomon hire to take charge of building the temple?
Huram of Tyre (1 Kings 7.13--14)

Whom did Sparta defeat to end the Peloponnesian War?
Athens

Whose palace had a hand that wrote on the wall?
Belshazzar's (Dan. 5.5)

Whose temple did Abimelech burn while the people of Shechem were hiding inside?
the temple of the god Berith (Judg. 9.46--49)

Why did John not see a temple in the new Jerusalem?
God and the Lamb are the temple (Rev. 21.22)

Why was Handel's collection of three suites called Water music?
it was first performed on a barge on the River Thames after King George I requested a concert there (17 July 1717)

With what Canadian saint, who had a pious devotion to St. Joseph, is St. Joseph's Oratory in Montreal associated?
St. André Bessette

With what French dynasty are the castles on the Loire, like Blois, Chenonceau, Chambord, and Amboise, as well as the French Wars of Religion, associated?
Valois

With what movement is Vincent van Gogh associated?
post-impressionism

Yasser Arafat founded this political and military group in 1958 to establish a Palestinian state. What organization dominated the Palestine Liberation Organization from the 1960s, and in 2006 was defeated by Hamas in the Palestinian National Authority elections?
Fatah

(15--69) This Roman emperor was acclaimed emperor in January 69 by the legions in Germany during the civil wars that followed the death of Nero. He defeated Otho but was killed by the supporters of Vespasian. What was his name?
Aulus Vitellius

(406--53) What king of the Huns ravaged vast areas between the Rhine and the Caspian Sea before being defeated by the joint forces of the Roman army and the Visigoths at Châlons in 451?
Attila

(980--1037) What Persian philosopher and physician had a philosophical system drawing on Aristotle but similar to Neoplatonism that was the major influence on the development of scholasticism and wrote a standard medieval medical text: The Canon of Medicine?
Avicenna (ibn-Sina)

(1330--76) What distinctive name did Edward III of England's eldest son and King Richard II's father, responsible for the British victory at Poitiers in 1356, have?
Black Prince

(1431--1506) What Italian painter and engraver noted for his frescos, demonstrating mastery of perspective and foreshortening, took a fundamentally sculptural approach to painting and led a workshop that was the leading producer of prints in Venice before 1500?
Andrea Mantegna

(1475--1519) What Spanish explorer reached the western coast of the Darien isthmus (Panama) in 1513, thereby becoming the first European to see the Pacific Ocean's eastern shores?
Vasco Núñez de Balboa

(1483--1530) What first Mughal emperor of India, a descendent of Tamerlane, invaded India circa 1525 and conquered the territory that extended from the Oxus to Patna?
Babur

(1486--1531) What Italian painter of the High Renaissance created a cycle of frescos in the Basilica della Santissima Annunziata in Florence (1514--24)?
Andrea del Sarto

(1500--71) What Florentine goldsmith, sculptor, and Mannerist is remembered for his skill as displayed in Perseus with the Head of Medusa?
Benvenuto Cellini

(1506--52) What Spanish Catholic missionary and saint (feast day 3 December) known as the Apostle of the Indies was one of the original seven Jesuits and travelled to southern India, Sri Lanka, Malacca, the Moluccas, and Japan where he made thousands of converts?
St. Francis Xavier

(1507--36) For whom did Henry VIII divorce Catherine of Aragon, falling from favour when she failed to provide him with a male heir and executed due to alleged infidelities?
Anne Boleyn

(1508--80) What Italian architect who led a revival of classical architecture by promoting the Roman ideals of harmonic proportions and symmetrical planning designed the church of San Giorgio Maggiore, Venice?
Andrea Palladio

(1514--64) What Flemish anatomist and founder of modern anatomy wrote De Humani Corporis Fabrica (1543), which contains accurate descriptions of human anatomy, but owed much of its significant historical impact to the woodcuts of his dissections?
Andreas Vesalius

(1545--1613) What English scholar and diplomat enlarged the Oxford University library, which was renamed after him in 1602?
Sir Thomas Bodley

(1572--1637) What British playwright and poet established his ``comedy of humours'' with his play Every man in his humour (1598), in which a particular obsession dominates each character, and wrote Volpone (1606) and Bartholomew fair (1614)?
Ben Jonson

(1584--1616) This Englishman collaborated with John Fletcher on Philaster (1609), The maid's tragedy (1610--11), and many other plays. Identify this playwright, to whom The knight of the burning pestle (c. 1607) is attributed.
Francis Beaumont

(1585--1642) What French cardinal and statesman was chief minister to Louis XIII (1624--42) and established the Académie française in 1635?
Duc de Richelieu (Cardinal Richelieu)

(1598--1680) What Italian baroque sculptor, painter, and architect created the great canopy over the altar and the colonnade around the piazza at St. Peter's, Rome?
Gian Lorenzo Bernini

(1613--1700) What French landscape gardener (the principal gardener of King Louis XIV) designed the parks of Vaux-le-Vicomte and Versailles, which incorporated his ideas on geometric formality and equilibrium?
André Le Nôtre

(1618--82) Name the Spanish painter noted for his genre scenes of urchins and peasants and his devotional pictures.
Bartolomé Esteban Murillo

(1618--1707) What Mughal emperor of Hindustan increased the empire to its greatest extent and compiled the Fatawa-e-Alamgiri?
Aurangzeb

(1621--78) Most works of this metaphysical poet were published posthumously and not recognized until the twentieth century. What English poet wrote ``To his coy mistress'' and ``An Horatian ode on Cromwell's return from Ireland''?
Andrew Marvell

(1626--97) What English antiquarian and author is noted for Brief lives, a collection of biographies of eminent people?
John Aubrey

(1632--77) What Dutch philosopher espoused a pantheistic system, seeing ``God or nature'' as a single infinite substance, with mind and matter being two incommensurable ways of conceiving the one reality?
Baruch de Spinoza

(1636--1711) What founder of French literary criticism's didactic poem Art poétique (1674) defined principles of composition and criticism?
Nicholas Boileau

(1667--1735) Whose satirical History of John Bull was the origin of John Bull as the personification of the typical Englishman?
John Arbuthnot

(1711--78) She taught philosophy, mathematics, and physics as a professor at the University of Bologna. She was the first woman to pursue a scientific career for which she was paid a salary. Identify this Italian physicist and professor who gave private instruction in physics and performed experiments in her home.
Laura Bassi

(1728--99) What Scottish chemist developed accurate techniques for following chemical reactions by weighing reactants and products?
Joseph Black

(1731--1806) This American was born to a slave father and freed slave mother and published an almanac 1791--1802 that featured his astronomical and tide calculations. Name this inventor, astronomer, and mathematician who was hired on Thomas Jefferson's recommendation to assist in the surveying of the District of Columbia in 1790.
Benjamin Banneker

(1732--99) What French playwright is noted for comedies The barber of Seville (1775) and The marriage of Figaro (1784)?
Pierre de Beaumarchais

(1740--48) What group of several related conflicts was triggered by Emperor Charles VI's death and the accession of his daughter Maria Theresa in 1740 to the Austrian throne?
War of the Austrian Succession

(1748--1832) What English philosopher, jurist, and proponent of utilitarianism wrote Introduction to the principles of morals and legislation (1789)?
Jeremy Bentham

(1752--1840) This physiologist and anatomist is regarded as the founder of physical anthropology, although his approach has since been much modified. Name this German who classified modern human beings into five broad categories (Caucasian, Mongoloid, Malayan, Ethiopian, and American), based mainly on cranial measurements?
Johann Friedrich Blumenbach

(1753--1809) What French balloonist made the first air crossing of the English Channel with American John Jeffries in 1785?
Jean-Pierre Blanchard

(1754--1817) What British naval officer, the captain of HMS Bounty, was set adrift in an open boat by part of his crew in 1789 and landed safely at Timor a few weeks later?
William Bligh

(1763--1844) What French soldier and marshal of Napoleon was adopted by Charles XIII of Sweden in 1810 and later became king, thus founding Sweden's present royal house?
Jean Bernadotte

(1767--1845) During his presidency, the US national debt was paid off completely, the Wisconsin Territory was organized, Michigan was admitted as the 26th state, and Texas' independence was recognized. What seventh POTUS, known as Old Hickory, was a general of the US Army in the War of 1812 (known for his successful defence of New Orleans), vetoed the renewal of the charter of the Bank of the United States, opposed the nullification issue in South Carolina, and initiated the spoils system?
Andrew Jackson

(1767--1845) What German romantic poet and critic, among the founders of art history and comparative philology, was a leading figure within Jena Romanticism with his brother Friedrich and known for his German translations of Shakespearean works and the Bhagavadgita?
August Wilhelm von Schlegel

(1774--1845) What American folk hero and Swedenborgian missionary travelled throughout Ohio and Indiana planting and caring for apple orchards?
Johnny Appleseed

(1775--1817) What English novelist wrote Sense and sensibility (1811), Pride and prejudice (1813), Mansfield Park (1814), Emma (1815), Northanger Abbey (1818), and Persuasion (1818)?
Jane Austen

(1779--1848) What Swedish analytical chemist discovered cerium, selenium, and thorium?
Jöns Jakob Berzelius

(1784--1846) What German astronomer and mathematician determined the positions of about 75,000 stars, obtained accurate measurements of stellar distances, predicted the existence of an eighth planet following a study of the orbit of Uranus, and is the namesake of the solution to a differential equation first defined by Daniel Bernoulli?
Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel

(1785--1851) What American naturalist and artist is noted for The birds of America (1827--38), in which he portrayed even the largest birds life-size and painted them in action?
John James Audubon

(1788--1827) What French physicist and civil engineer correctly postulated that light moves in a wave-like motion transverse to the direction of propagation?
Augustin Jean Fresnel

(1789--1857) What greatly influential French mathematician founded modern theory of elasticity, almost singlehandedly established complex analysis and the study of permutation groups, proved Fermat's polygonal number theorem, and was a professor at École Polytechnique, Paris?
Augustin Louis Cauchy

(1790--1859) What English jurist wrote works noted for their strict delimitation of the sphere of law and its distinction from morality?
John Austin

(1791--1871) What English mathematician, inventor, and pioneer of machine computing designed a mechanical computer that would perform calculations and print the results with Ada Lovelace, though he could not complete it during his lifetime?
Charles Babbage

(1792--1876) What German biologist discovered that ova are particles within the ovarian follicles and formulated the principle that general characters appear before special ones do in the developing embryo, his studies used by Darwin in the theory of evolution?
Karl Ernest von Baer

(1795--1860) What English architect designed the Houses of Parliament?
Sir Charles Barry

(1798--1857) What French philosopher and founder of sociology had a positivist philosophy that attempted to define the laws of social evolution and to found a genuine social science that could be used for social reconstruction?
Auguste Comte

(1799--1850) What French novelist is chiefly remembered for his series of ninety-one interconnected novels and stories known collectively as La comédie humaine?
Honoré de Balzac

(1801--35) What Italian opera composer is known for La Sonnambula (1831), Norma (1831), and I Puritani (1835)?
Vincenzo Bellini

(1801--59) What German publisher is remembered chiefly for the series of travel guidebooks to which he gave his name and which are still published?
Karl Baedeker

(1803--69) What French composer's works include Les Troyens (opera, 1856--59), Symphonie fantastique (1830), and La Damnation de Faust (cantata, 1846)?
Hector Berlioz

(1805--75) What Danish author wrote ``The snow queen,'' ``The little match girl,'' and ``The ugly duckling''?
Hans Christian Andersen

(1806--72) What Mexican statesman was replaced as emperor by Maximilian, who was supported by the French, between 1864 and 1867?
Benito Pablo Juárez

(1808--75) What seventeenth POTUS succeeded to the presidency upon Lincoln's assassination and was the first president to be impeached?
Andrew Johnson

(1810--91) This American was noted for his extravagant advertising and exhibition of freaks at his museum in New York City. When his circus opened in 1871, he billed it as ``the greatest show on earth.'' Name this showman who founded a circus with former rival Anthony Bailey (1847--1906) ten years later.
P. T. Barnum

(1813--78) What French physiologist showed the role of the pancreas in digestion, the regulation of body temperature, and the function of nerves that supply the internal organs?
Claude Bernard

(1813--85) What Irish physical chemist discovered the critical temperature of CO2 and showed that ozone is an allotrope of oxygen?
Thomas Andrews

(1814--76) What Russian anarchist and writer who participated in the revolutionary movements of 1848 to 1849 was a founder of the revolutionary socialist and social anarchist tradition?
Mikhail Bakunin

(1818--93) Name the confederate army officer who served as superintendent of the US Military Academy at West Point but resigned in 1861 to join the Confederacy and commanded the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter, which officially began the Civil War.
P. G. T. Beauregard

(1821--67) What French poet and critic is noted for Les Fleurs du mal (1857), a series of one hundred and one lyrics that explore his isolation and melancholy and the attraction of evil and the macabre?
Charles Baudelaire

(1821--1910) What English-born American physician was the first woman to receive a medical degree in the US (1849) and the first woman listed in the Medical Register of the United Kingdom (1859)?
Elizabeth Blackwell

(1824--84) What Czech nationalist composer is known for operas such as The Bartered Bride (1866) and his cycle of symphonic poems titled Ma Vlast?
Bedřich Smetana

(1825--1900) What English novelist is noted for his romantic novel Lorna Doone (1869)?
R. D. Blackmore

(1827--1900) This English archaeologist and anthropologist's collection of weapons and artifacts from different cultures formed the basis of the ethnological museum in Oxford that bears his name. Name this Englishman who developed a new scientific approach to archaeology.
Augustus Pitt-Rivers

(1829--86) What twenty-first President of the United States was a New York Republican who became James Garfield's Vice President in March 1881, succeeding to the presidency upon Garfield's assassination six months later?
Chester Alan Arthur

(1830--1926) What German-born American businessman co-founded an optical company with Henry Lomb in 1853?
John Jacob Bausch

(1831--91) What Ukrainian-born Russian spiritualist co-founded the Theosophical Society in New York in 1875?
Helena ``Madame'' Blavatsky

(1832--1901) What American industrialist reorganized his brother Herman's grain commission house into the Armour \& Co. meatpacking company in 1870?
Philip Danforth Armour

(1833--1901) He was the twenty-third President of the United States. As an Indiana Republican, he served as a US senator from 1881--87. During his administration, Oklahoma was settled, and the way was paved for the annexation of Hawaii. Identify this statesman who was not re-elected due to deterioration of the economy and labour unrest.
Benjamin Harrison

(1834--1914) What German biologist, one of the founders of modern genetics, expounded the theory of germ plasm and suggested that variability in individuals comes from the recombination of chromosomes during reproduction?
August Weismann

(1835--1919) What Scottish-born American industrialist and philanthropist built up a fortune in the steel industry in the US and after retirement devoted his wealth to charitable purposes, in particular libraries, education, and the arts?
Andrew Carnegie

(1840--1917) This French sculptor was chiefly concerned with the human form, and his first significant work, The age of bronze (1875--76), was considered so lifelike that he was alleged to have taken a cast from a live model. Name this sculptor who also created The thinker (1880) and The kiss (1886).
Auguste Rodin

(1841--1919) This French painter and impressionist developed a style characterized by light, fresh colours and indistinct, subtle outlines. In his later work, he concentrated on the human, especially female, form. Name this impressionist who painted Le moulin de la galette (1876) and The judgment of Paris (c. 1914).
Pierre Auguste Renoir

(1844--79, feast day: 18 February) The visions of what French peasant girl of the Virgin Mary at Lourdes in 1858 led to the town's establishment as a center of pilgrimage?
St. Bernadette

(1844--1906) What Austrian physicist made contributions to the kinetic theory of gases, statistical mechanics, and thermodynamics and derived an equation for the distribution of energy among colliding atoms with Maxwell?
Ludwig Boltzmann

(1844--1923) What French actress was noted for her portrayal of Marguerite in La Dame aux camélias and Cordelia in King Lear?
Sarah Bernhardt

(1844--1924) What French writer wrote Le crime de Sylvestre and Penguin island, which satirizes the Dreyfus affair? He won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1921.
Anatole France (Jacques-Anatole-François Thibault)

(1848--1907) What Irish-born American sculptor is best remembered for his coin designs and his sculptures, such as General Sherman on horseback (1903) at the corner of New York City's Central Park and Diana (1892--93)?
Augustus Saint-Gaudens

(1849--1912) This Swedish playwright and novelist's The red room (1879) is regarded as Sweden's first modern novel. Identify this playwright whose later plays are typically tense, psychic dramas, such as A dream play (1902)?
August Strindberg

(1851--1941) What English archaeologist uncovered a Bronze Age civilization (Crete), which he named Minoan after Cretan king Minos, after excavations at Knossos?
Sir Arthur Evans

(1853--1914) What French criminologist devised a system of body measurements for identifying criminals, widely used until superseded by the technique of fingerprinting at the beginning of the twentieth century?
Alphonse Bertillon

(1853--1923) What German chemist devised a method of determining a compound's molecular weight by measuring the rise in the boiling point of a solvent containing the compound?
Ernst Otto Beckmann

(1854--1917) What German bacteriologist was one of the founders of immunology and received the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1901)?
Emil Adolf von Behring

(1855--1937) What American secretary of the treasury (1923--32) donated his art collection and made gifts to establish the National Gallery of Art in Washington, DC in 1941?
Andrew Mellon

(1856--1919) What American journalist and author wrote children's books like Father Goose: His Book (1899), The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1900), and other Oz books?
L. Frank Baum

(1856--1950) Identify the Irish playwright, writer, and Nobel laureate (1925) who wrote Candida (1897), Man and Superman (1903), Major Barbara (1905), Pygmalion (1913), and St. Joan (1923).
George Bernard Shaw

(1857--1911) This French psychologist and Théodore Simon developed a pioneering system of intelligence tests. He devised a mental age scale that described performance in relation to the average performance of students of the same physical age. What was his name?
Alfred Binet

(1858--1942) What German-born American pioneer of modern anthropology developed the linguistic and cultural components of ethnology, did much to overturn the theory that Nordic peoples constitute an essentially superior race (his books being burned by the Nazis), and wrote Race, language, and culture (1940)?
Franz Boas

(1859--81) What American outlaw, murderer, and notorious robber was captured by Sheriff Pat Garrett in 1880 and shot by Garrett after he had escaped from jail?
Billy the Kid

(1859--1941) What French philosopher wrote Creative evolution (1907) and won the Nobel Prize for Literature (1927)?
Henri Bergson

(1860--1937) What Scottish playwright and novelist wrote Peter Pan (1904) and The admirable Crichton (1902)?
Sir J. M. Barrie

(1860--1948) What United States army officer's Meuse-Argonne offensive in 1918 led to the final collapse of the German Army?
John J. ``Black Jack'' Pershing

(1861--1926) What English geneticist coined the term ``genetics'' in its current sense and publicized Mendel's work?
William Bateson

(1866--1924) What Russian painter and designer was a member of the Ballets Russes, for which he designed exotic, richly coloured sets and costumes, like in productions of ``Carnaval'' (1910), ``Spectre de la rose'' (1911), ``Daphnis and Chloe'' (1912), and ``The Sleeping Princess'' (1921)?
Léon Bakst

(1866--1943) What English children's writer is known for her series of animal stories, illustrated with her delicate watercolours, which began with The tale of Peter Rabbit (first published privately in 1900)?
Beatrix Potter

(1866--1952) Identify the Italian philosopher and politician whose ``philosophy of spirit'' denied the physical reality of a work of art and identified philosophical endeavour with a methodological approach to history.
Benedetto Croce

(1867--1957) What Italian conductor was musical director at La Scala in Milan (1898--1903, 1906-08) before becoming a conductor at the Metropolitan Opera in New York City (1908--21) and the New York Philharmonic Orchestra (1928--38) and founded the NBC Symphony Orchestra in 1937?
Arturo Toscanini

(1869--1951) This novelist is considered the father of modern French literature and won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1947. What French essayist and critic wrote The immortalist, La porte étroite, The counterfeiters, Les caves du Vatican, and his Journal (1939--50)?
André Gide

(1870--1953) What French-born British writer is known for Cautionary tales (1907)?
Hilaire Belloc

(1870--1965) What American financier was an advisor to Presidents Woodrow Wilson and Franklin D. Roosevelt, serving as chairman of the War Industries Board (1918--19) and United States representative on the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission (1946)?
Bernard Baruch

(1872--1936) What French aviation pioneer became the first person to cross the English Channel (Calais to Dover) in a monoplane on 25 July 1909?
Louis Blériot

(1872--1950) What French statesman introduced significant labour reforms as France's first socialist and Jewish prime minister?
Léon Blum

(1872--1961) What American jurist and writer wrote over 2,000 opinions as judge of the US Court of Appeals and authored The Spirit of Liberty (1952) and The Bill of Rights (1958)?
Learned Hand

(1873--1941) What German psychiatrist detected electric currents in the brain's cortex and developed encephalography?
Hans Berger

(1874--1925) What American imagist poet is known for her polyphonic prose and sensuous imagery and posthumously won the Pulitzer Prize for Poetry?
Amy Lowell

(1874--1937) What English theatre manager is noted for her management of the Old Vic and for her initiative in reopening the old Sadler's Wells Theatre in 1931?
Lilian Baylis

(1877--1945) What English physicist invented the mass spectrograph with Thomson and discovered many of the 287 naturally-occurring isotopes of nonradioactive elements, winning the Nobel Prize for Chemistry (1922)?
Francis William Aston

(1879--1936) What French-born American army officer was an outspoken advocate of air power and court-martialed in 1925 for his criticism of the war and navy departments?
Billy Mitchell

(1879--1961) What English conductor and impresario founded the London Philharmonic in 1932 and the Royal Philharmonic in 1947?
Sir Thomas Beecham

(1880--1918) What French poet coined the term ``surrealist,'' was acknowledged by surrealist poets as their precursor, and wrote Alcools (1913) and Calligrammes (1918, posthumous)?
Guillaume Apollinaire

(1880--1959) This Swiss-born American composer's work reflects the influence of the late nineteenth-century romanticism of Liszt and Richard Strauss and Jewish musical forms. Name this composer of the Israel symphony (1912--16) and Solomon (1916).
Ernest Bloch

(1881--1945) Identify the Hungarian composer of Concerto for Orchestra (1943) and Duke Bluebeard's Castle (opera, 1911) whose work owes much to Hungarian folk music.
Béla Bartók

(1881--1956) What American industrialist founded United Aircraft and Transport in 1927, which divided into three separate corporations in 1934, one of which was named after him?
William Edward Boeing

(1883--1983) What American jazz pianist and composer was one of the foremost ragtime pianists and wrote many songs in collaboration with lyricist Noble Sissle?
Eubie Blake

(1884--1949) What German industrial chemist shared the Nobel Prize for Chemistry (1931) with Carl Bosch?
Friedrich Bergius

(1884--1950) What German painter and graphic artist created paintings that reflected his first-hand experience of human evil during World War I?
Max Beckmann

(1886--1956) What American businessman, inventor, and fur trader observed food preservation techniques practiced by the people of Labrador and developed a process of rapidly freezing foods in small packages that were suitable for retail sale and created a revolution in eating habits?
Clarence Birdseye

(1886--1968) Identify the Swiss theologian whose seminal work Epistle to the Romans (1919) established a neo-orthodox or theocentric approach to contemporary religious thought that remains influential in Protestant theology.
Karl Barth

(1886--1973) What statesman was Israel's first prime minister and minister of defence?
David Ben-Gurion

(1887--1949) What American linguist and founder of American structural linguistics had the primary aim of establishing linguistics as an autonomous and scientific discipline and wrote Language (1933)?
Leonard Bloomfield

(1887--1964) What Russian-born American sculptor adapted cubist techniques to sculpture and made Walking woman?
Alexander Archipenko

(1887--1966) What French painter, sculptor, and poet cofounded the Dada movement and is noted for his three-dimensional abstract curvilinear sculptures in marble and bronze?
Jean Arp

(1888--1927) Identify the Italian-born American political radical who was accused and convicted of murder in a sensational trial along with Nicola Sacco, both men being executed years later in the electric chair.
Bartolomeo Vanzetti

(1888--1972) What Russian aeronautical engineer produced Russia's first jet bomber and jet passenger plane, as well as the world's first supersonic airliner, preceding the Concorde?
Andrei Nikolaievich Tupolev

(1888--1989) What Russian-born American songwriter's prolific work includes ``Alexander's ragtime band'' (1911) and ``God bless America'' (1918), the movie scores for Top hat (1935) and White Christmas (1954), and the stage musicals Annie get your gun (1946) and Call me madam (1950)?
Irving Berlin

(1890) In what final confrontation between the US Army and North American Indians in South Dakota were more than 150 largely unarmed Sioux men, women, and children massacred?
Battle of Wounded Knee

(1891--1941) What Canadian physiologist and surgeon discovered insulin with the assistance of Best, using it to treat diabetes, and won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1923) with Macleod?
Sir Frederick Banting

(1892--1965) What English physicist discovered a region of ionized gases in the atmosphere above the Heaviside or E layer, won the 1947 Nobel Prize for Physics, and shares his surname with an industrial and academic city in Wisconsin?
Sir Edward Victor Appleton

(1892--1982) What American poet and public official was the ninth Librarian of Congress at the request of FDR and wrote Conquistador (1932), Panic (1935), and JB (1958)?
Archibald MacLeish

(1893--1953) What American tennis player won the men's singles title at seven US Open and three Wimbledon tournaments and led his country to seven straight Davis Cup victories (1920--26)?
Bill Tilden

(1893--1960) What German-born American astronomer proved that Andromeda was much farther away than speculated, implying that the universe was much older and more extensive than supposed, and contributed to the understanding of the life cycles of stars?
Walter Baade

(1893--1981) What American writer is best known for her 1925 comic novel Gentlemen prefer blondes, later adapted for stage and screen?
Anita Loos

(1893--1987) What Spanish guitarist and composer was largely responsible for the revival of the classical guitar, elevating it to use as a concert instrument and making a large number of transcriptions of classical music to increase the instrument's repertoire?
Andrés Segovia

(1895--1948) As vice president of the Swedish Red Cross, this statesman arranged the exchange of prisoners of war and, in 1945, conveyed a German offer of capitulation to the Allies. Name this Swede who the Stern Gang assassinated after being appointed as United Nations mediator in Palestine in 1948.
Folke Bernadotte

(1895--1948) What American baseball player known as the ``Bambino'' and the ``Sultan of Swat'' was originally a pitcher who later became noted for his hitting, setting a record of 714 home runs that remained unbroken until 1974 and a single-season record in 1927 of 60 home runs that was not broken until 1961?
Babe Ruth

(1895--1967) What American comedian and actor starred in The wizard of Oz (1939) as the cowardly lion and also starred in Ship ahoy (1942) and The night they raided Minsky's (1968)?
Bert Lahr

(1895--1972) What Spanish couturier contributed to the move away from the tight-waisted New Look originated by Christian Dior to a looser, semifitted style in the 1950s?
Cristóbal Balenciaga

(1896--1948) What French actor, director, and poet developed the concept of the nonverbal Theatre of Cruelty, which concentrated on the use of sound, mime, and lighting, elucidating his theory in a series of essays Le Théâtre et son double (1938)?
Antonin Artaud

(1896--1966) This poet was first involved with Dadaism and later launched the surrealist movement. What French essayist and critic outlined this movement's philosophy in his manifesto of 1924 and is characterized by techniques like automatic writing?
André Breton

(1896--1987) What French surrealist painter and graphic artist pioneered automatic drawing: a form of fluid, spontaneous composition intended to express images emerging from the unconscious?
André Masson

(1897--1941) What American linguist, insurance worker, and linguistics student, known for his contribution to a hypothesis in collaboration with Edward Sapir, studied Hopi and other North American Indian languages and attended Sapir's courses at Yale?
Benjamin Lee Whorf

(1898--1956) What German playwright, producer, and poet collaborated with Kurt Weill in The threepenny opera (1928) and also created Mother courage (1941) and The Caucasian chalk circle (1948)?
Bertolt Brecht

(1898--1989) What Lithuanian-born American artist and photographer devoted paintings like ``The passion of Sacco and Vanzetti'' (1931--32) to political and social themes and was a photographer for the United States Farm Security Administration during the 1930s?
Ben Shahn

(1899--1953) What Soviet politician and head of the secret police was arrested and executed after Stalin's death?
Lavrenti Beria

(1899--1957) What American actor played a ruthless gangster in The Petrified Forest and also played a role in Casablanca (1942), The big sleep (1946), and The African queen (1951)?
Humphrey Bogart

(1899--1974) What Guatemalan novelist and poet wrote The president (1946) and won the Nobel Prize for Literature (1967)?
Miguel Ángel Asturias

(1899--1978) What American-born Canadian physiologist assisted Banting in research leading to the discovery of insulin in 1922?
Charles Herbert Best

(1899--1983) What French composer composed scores for movies like The Lavender Hill mob (1951) and Moulin Rouge (1952)?
Georges Auric

(1899--1987) What American dancer, singer, and actor starred in Top hat (1935) and Shall we dance? (1937) with Ginger Rogers and Easter parade (1948) with Judy Garland?
Fred Astaire

(1901--73) Fidel Castro overthrew the second government of what Cuban soldier and statesman?
Fulgencio Batista

(1901--76) This novelist wrote La condition humaine (Man's fate, 1933). What French politician and art critic was involved in the Chinese communist uprising of 1927 and the Spanish Civil War and later appointed France's first Minister of Cultural Affairs?
André Malraux

(1902--71) What American golfer won thirteen major competitions in his short competitive career as an amateur, including four US and three British open championships?
Bobby Jones

(1902--92) She won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1983). Identify this American geneticist, whose findings of transposable genetic elements were supported by Watson and Crick's DNA model.
Barbara McClintock

(1902--97) What Austrian-born British opera was the conductor and director of the Metropolitan Opera in New York City 1950--72, hired Marian Anderson in 1955, ending the Met's unwritten ban against African Americans, and was knighted in 1971?
Sir Rudolf Bing

(1903--31) What American jazz musician, composer, and autodidactic cornetist and pianist profoundly influenced the development of jazz?
Bix Beiderbecke

(1903--41) What English aviator was the first woman to fly solo to Australia and set records with her solo flights to Tokyo and Cape Town?
Amy Johnson

(1903--75) What English sculptor who worked in wood, stone, and bronze is noted for her simple monumental works in landscape and architectural settings, including the nine-piece group The family of a man (1972)?
Barbara Hepworth

(1903--77) What French-born American writer published House of incest in 1936 and went on to produce collections of short stories, essays, diaries, and erotica?
Anaïs Nin

(1903--77) What American singer and actor sang ``Pennies from heaven,'' ``Blue skies,'' and ``White Christmas''?
Bing Crosby

(1903--85) What American chef and cookbook author hosted the first televised cooking show and founded a cooking school in New York?
James Beard

(1904--48) What Turkish-born American painter was an exponent of expressionism and is best known for his work in the early 1940s, e.g. Waterfall (1943)?
Arshile Gorky

(1904--83) This choreographer is noted for ballets such as The firebird (1949) and A midsummer night's dream (1962). Name this Russian-born American ballet dancer who was the chief choreographer of Diaghilev's Ballets Russes during the 1920s and co-founded the company that later became the New York City Ballet in 1934.
George Balanchine

(1904--84) What American jazz pianist, organist, and bandleader formed an eponymous orchestra in 1935 that became one of the best-known and most successful bands of the swing era?
Count Basie

(1904--87) What American dancer and actor is best known for his role as the scarecrow in The wizard of Oz (1939)?
Ray Bolger

(1905--70) As a seminal figure in colour-field painting, what American painter juxtaposed large blocks of uniform colour with narrow marginal strips of contrasting colours, such as in Who's afraid of red, yellow, and blue III (1966--67)?
Barnett Newman

(1905--82) This Russian-born American writer and philosopher developed a philosophy of ``objectivism'' in For the new intellectual (1961), arguing for ``rational self-interest,'' individualism, and laissez-faire capitalism. Name this female author of The fountainhead (1943) and Atlas shrugged (1957).
Ayn Rand

(1906--75) This German-born American philosopher and political theorist was a student of Heidegger. She established her reputation as a political thinker with one of the first works to propose that Nazism and Stalinism had common roots. Name the author of The origins of totalitarianism (1951), Eichmann in Jerusalem (1963), and On violence (1970).
Hannah Arendt

(1906--75) What Greek shipping magnate and international businessman owned a substantial shipping empire, founded Olympic Airways in 1957, and married the widow of JFK in 1968?
Aristotle Onassis

(1906--89) This Irishman won the Nobel Prize for Literature (1969). Name this playwright, novelist, and poet known for Waiting for Godot (1952), a seminal work in the Theater of the Absurd.
Samuel Beckett

(1906--1997) What Malawian statesman was prime minister (1964--94) and the first president of the Republic of Malawi (1966--94)?
Hastings Kamuzu Banda

(1906--2002) What Austrian-born American movie director and screenwriter spearheaded Double indemnity (1944), The lost weekend (1945), Sunset Boulevard (1950), Sabrina (1954), Some like it hot (1959), and The apartment (1960)?
Billy Wilder

(1907--73) What British-born left-wing poet wrote Look, stranger! (1936) and Spain (1937, on the Civil War), won the Pulitzer Prize for The age of anxiety (1947), and collaborated with Benjamin Britten on Hymn to St. Cecilia and the operetta Paul Bunyan?
W. H. Auden

(1908--91) This physicist developed a point-contact transistor with Shockley and Brattain, for which they won a Nobel Prize (1956). Identify this American who developed BCS theory, for which he shared the Nobel Prize in 1972 with Cooper and Schrieffer.
John Bardeen

(1909--34) What American bank robber and murderer shot and killed at least thirteen people during a notorious two-year crime spree across the Southwest with his partner Bonnie Parker?
Clyde Barrow

(1909--46) What German artist and nun created the sketches upon which figurines made by the Franz Goebel Company are based?
Berta Hummel

(1909--89) What Soviet statesman (foreign minister 1957--85, president 1985--88) was appointed to the presidency by Gorbachev to reduce his influence and make it possible to end the Cold War?
Andrei Gromyko

(1910--81) What American composer who developed a style based on romanticism allied to classical forms wrote Adagio for strings (1936) and Vanessa (opera, 1958)?
Samuel Barber

(1910--87) What American civil rights leader, peace activist, and special assistant to Martin Luther King Jr. helped organize the 1963 March on Washington and was the executive director of the A. Philip Randolph Institute (1964--87)?
Bayard Rustin

(1910--2000) What American Communist Party leader, who joined the Communist Party in 1934 and served as national secretary (1950--59) before becoming general secretary, was the US Communist Party's presidential candidate in four elections from 1972 to 1984?
Gus Hall (Arvo Kustaa Halberg)

(1911--56) What American track and field athlete turned to golf and won many major professional titles between 1936 and 1954 after winning gold medals in javelin and eighty-meter hurdle events in the 1932 Olympics?
Babe Zaharias

(1911--79) This American poet's poetry contrasted her experiences in South America (1952--67) with her New England origins. She was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for her first two collections, North and south (1946) and A cold spring (1955). She also wrote Geography III (1976). Who was she?
Elizabeth Bishop

(1912--89) What American historian and writer indited works like The guns of August (1962), Stilwell and the American experience in China, 1911--45 (1971), A distant mirror (1978), and The first salute (1988)?
Barbara W. Tuchman

(1913--76) What English composer, pianist, and conductor wrote operas like Peter Grimes (1945), A midsummer night's dream (1960), and Death in Venice (1973)?
Benjamin Britten

(1913-92) What Israeli won a Nobel Peace Prize (1978) with Anwar al-Sadat after signing a peace treaty with him?
Menachem Begin

(1914--72) What American poet and educator was a central figure in the Confessional school of poetry and is best known for The dream songs, which contains the Pulitzer Prize--winning 77 dream songs (1964)?
John Berryman

(1915--59) This jazz singer began her recording career with Benny Goodman's band in 1933 and then performed with many small jazz groups. Identify this American whose autobiography Lady sings the blues (1956) was made into a movie in 1972.
Billie Holiday

(1915--80) Identify the French writer, critic, and leading exponent of structuralism and semiology in literary criticism who authored On Racine (1963), Mythologies (1957), and Elements of semiology (1964).
Roland Barthes

(1915--82) What Swedish actress starred in Casablanca (1942), Gaslight (1944), Anastasia (1956), and Murder on the Orient Express (1974)?
Ingrid Bergman

(1915--2005) This American playwright achieved success with Death of a salesman (1949). The crucible (1953) used the Salem witch trials of 1692 as an allegory for McCarthyism. Name this playwright, who also wrote All my sons (1947), After the Fall (1964), and The Ryan interview (1995).
Arthur Miller

(1915--2005) What Canadian-born American novelist and Nobel laureate (1976) of Russian-Jewish descent is known for The adventures of Augie March (1953), Herzog (1964), More die of heartbreak (1987), and Ravelstein (2000)?
Saul Bellow

(1916--97) What American jockey was the first two-time Triple Crown winner, riding Whirlaway in 1941 and Citation in 1948?
Eddie Arcaro

(1916--2000) The world's first woman prime minister, what Sinhalese stateswoman succeeded her husband, S. W. R. D. Bandaranaike (1899--1959), after his assassination, their daughter becoming president (1994--2005)?
Sirimavo Bandaranaike

(1916--2011) What American composer and mathematician noted as a pioneer of electronic music wrote music developed from the twelve-note system of Schoenberg and Webern?
Milton Babbitt

(1917--85) What German novelist and short-story writer is known for Billiards at half past nine (1959) and The lost honor of Katharina Blum (1974) and won the Nobel Prize for Literature (1972)?
Heinrich Böll

(1917--2010) What American lawyer and author depicted life among New York City elite in his novels and short stories?
Andrew Lee (Louis Stanton Auchincloss)

(1917--2012) What British physiologist worked with Hodgkin on the physiology of nerve transmission and won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1963) with Hodgkin and Eccles?
Sir Andrew Fielding Huxley

(1918--90) What American composer, conductor, and pianist wrote The age of anxiety (symphony, 1947--49), West side story (musical, 1957), and music for the movie On the waterfront (1954)?
Leonard Bernstein

(1918--2005) What Swedish soprano gained international success in the 1950s, being particularly noted for her interpretation of Wagnerian roles?
Birgit Nilsson

(1918--2007) What Swedish movie and theatre director used haunting imagery and symbolism in films like Smiles of a summer night (1955), The seventh seal (1957), Fanny and Alexander (1982), and The virgin spring (1960)?
Ingmar Bergman

(1921--2006) What Dutch painter, sculptor, and graphic artist founded the avant-garde movement COBRA?
Karel Appel

(1921--2017) This American economist is noted chiefly for his work on general economic equilibrium and social choice. His Social choices and individual values (1951) argued the impossibility of aggregating the preferences of individuals into a single combined order of priorities for society as a whole. Name this economist who won the Nobel Prize for Economics (1972) with Sir J. Hicks.
Kenneth Joseph Arrow

(1923--71) What American photographer is best known for her disturbing images of people on city streets?
Diane Arbus

(1923--85) What American actress won an Academy Award in 1946 for her supporting role in The razor's edge?
Anne Baxter

(1923--2016) What French fashion designer was a pilot for the French Air Force during World War II and famous for his futuristic and youth-oriented styles, particularly his use of plastic and metal and unisex fashion such as trouser suits for women?
André Courrèges

(1924--87) What American writer and civil rights activist wrote novels like Go tell it on the mountain (1953), Giovanni's room (1956), and Another country (1962) and essay collections like Nobody knows my name (1961) and The price of a ticket (1985)?
James Baldwin

(1924--2014) What American actress acted in movies with husband Humphrey Bogart like The big sleep (1946) and Key Largo (1948) and received Tonys for her lead roles in stage musicals Applause (1970) and Woman of the year (1981)?
Lauren Bacall

(1925--81) What American rock-and-roll singer sang ``Rock around the clock'' (1954)?
Bill Haley

(1925--2015) What American blues singer and guitarist came to the notice of a broader audience in the late 1960s when rock musicians imitated his guitar playing style and would go on to receive thirty Grammy nominations, fifteen wins, and a Lifetime Achievement award?
B. B. King

(1926--2017) What American rock-and-roll singer, guitarist, and songwriter who was once imprisoned is noted for ``Maybellene'' (1955), ``Johnny B Goode'' (1958), and ``My ding a ling'' (1972)?
Chuck Berry

(1927--87) This American jazz dancer and choreographer directed and choreographed Broadway musicals such as Pajama Game (1954) and Redhead (1958) and movies such as Cabaret (1972) and All That Jazz (1979). To whom was a Broadway musical of the same name dedicated?
Bob Fosse

(1928--2014) What American novelist and poet wrote the first volume of her autobiography, I know why the caged bird sings, about living as a black child in the south United States, and wrote six more: Gather Together in My Name (1974), Singin' and Swingin' and Gettin' Merry Like Christmas (1976), The Heart of a Woman (1981), All God's Children Need Travelling Shoes (1986), A Song Flung Up to Heaven (2002), and Mom \& Me \& Mom (2013)?
Maya Angelou

(1929--93) What Belgian-born American actress moved to Hollywood after pursuing a career as a stage and movie actress in Britain, starring in Roman Holiday (1953), Sabrina (1954), Breakfast at Tiffany's (1961), and My Fair Lady (1964)?
Audrey Hepburn

(1929--2007) What French sociologist, cultural critic, and post-modernist is known for Seduction (1978), Simulacra and Simulation (1981), America (1986), and The Gulf War Did Not Take Place (1991)?
Jean Baudrillard

(1929--2007) What American opera singer was a soprano with and the general director and president of the New York City Opera and became the first woman chairperson of the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts in 1993?
Beverly Sills

(1929--2019) What German-born American conductor, pianist, and composer conducted the LSO (1968--79), the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra (1976--86), and the RPO (1987--91)?
André Previn

(1930--99) What English composer and lyricist composed musicals like Oliver! (1960)?
Lionel Bart

(1930--2006) Who was the youngest male decathlon winner with a gold medal at the 1948 Olympics and another in the 1952 games, and a Republican member of the United States House of Representatives from California (1967--1975)?
Bob Mathias

(1930--2009) What British novelist and short-story writer wrote The Drowned World (1962), Crash (1973), and Empire of the Sun (1984)?
J. G. Ballard

(1931--90) What Indian guru founded an ashram in Pune and a commune in Oregon and preached his doctrine of communal therapy and salvation through free love?
Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh

(1931--2005) What American actress won a 1960 Tony Award and a 1962 Academy Award for her stage and film portrayal of Helen Keller's teacher Annie Sullivan in The Miracle Worker and played an iconic role in The Graduate (1967) as Mrs. Robinson?
Anne Bancroft

(1933--2009) What Philippine president (1986--92) had a son who was also president (2010--16) and was named Time's Woman of the Year in 1986?
Corazón Aquino

(1934--2003) What Tony Award--winning English actor is noted for films like The Caretaker (1964), Zorba the Greek (1964), The Fixer (1968), Women in Love (1969), and An Unmarried Woman (1978), as well as his roles on stage, like in Turgenev's Fortune's Fool (2002)?
Sir Alan Bates

(1940--92) What English novelist and short-story writer wrote The Magic Toyshop and Nights at the Circus?
Angela Carter

(1940--2018) What Italian film director directed The Spider's Stratagem (1970), Last Tango in Paris (1972), The Last Emperor (1987), and The Dreamers (2003)?
Bernardo Bertolucci

(1942--2018) This American soul and gospel singer became a hit with the album I never loved a man (1967). She later recorded albums like Amazing Grace (1972) and A Rose Is Still a Rose (1998). Name this Memphis-born singer.
Aretha Franklin

(1943--2008) What American chess player defeated Boris Spassky in 1972 to become world champion, a title he held until 1975?
Bobby Fischer

(1953--2007) What Pakistani stateswoman was the first woman prime minister of a Muslim country and assassinated in Pakistan while campaigning for re-election as prime minister?
Benazir Bhutto

(1957--2011) What Spanish golfer became the youngest player in the twentieth century to win the British Open in 1979, was the youngest-ever and the second European to win the Masters, and now holds the record for most European Tour wins (50)?
Severiano Ballesteros

(Benedict XII, 1336) What bull declared that the saved see Heaven before Judgement Day?
Benedictus Deus

(b. 1929) What Dutch musical director and orchestra conductor was the principal conductor of the London Philharmonic Orchestra (1967--79) and musical director of Glyndebourne (1977--87) and Covent Garden (from 1987)?
Bernard Haitink

(b. 1930) What American novelist and short-story writer is noted for complex experimental novels and wrote The Sot-Weed Factor (1960), Giles Goat-Boy (1966), and Letters (1979)?
John Barth

(b. 1934) What American basketball player and coach, the first African American head coach in the NBA, played for and coached the Celtics, coached the Seattle Supersonics and Sacramento Kings, and was inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame in 1974?
Bill Russell

(b. 1935) What American minimalist sculptor made works consisting of ready-made units such as bricks, stacked according to a mathematical system and without adhesives or joints?
Carl Andre

(b. 1937) What American actor, director, and screenwriter produced Bonnie and Clyde (1967), wrote and produced Shampoo (1975), co-directed Heaven Can Wait (1978), and was producer, co-writer, and Academy Award-winning director of Reds (1981)?
Warren Beatty

(b. 1937) What American comedian, actor, and writer wrote Fatherhood (1986) and Love and Marriage (1989)?
Bill Cosby

(b. 1939) What Canadian novelist, poet, critic, and short-story writer wrote The Edible Woman (1969), The Handmaid's Tale (1985), Cat's Eye (1989), and The Blind Assassin (Booker Prize, 2000)?
Margaret Atwood

(b. 1939) What English playwright wrote Relatively Speaking (1967), Absurd Person Singular (1973), and A Chorus of Disapproval (1985)?
Sir Alan Ayckbourn

(b. 1940) What Italian-born American motor racing driver won the F1 world championship in 1978 and won the IndyCar championship four times?
Mario Andretti

(b. 1941) What American folk singer and civil rights activist is best known for her performances at civil rights demonstrations in the early 1960s and albums like Any Day Now (1968) and Diamonds and Rust (1975)?
Joan Baez

(b. 1942) What Argentine pianist and conductor, the husband of Jacqueline du Pré, was musical director of the Orchestre de Paris (1975--88) and the Chicago Symphony Orchestra (1991--2006)?
Daniel Barenboim

(b. 1942) What Israeli Labour statesman who rose to Rav Aluf (Lieutenant-General), the highest in the Israeli military, was prime minister (1999--2001)?
Ehud Barak

(b. 1942) What American singer, actress, and director starred in movies like Funny girl (1968), The way we were (1973), A star is born (1976), and The prince of tides (1991) and also starred in, produced, and directed Yentl (1983)?
Barbra Streisand

(b. 1944) What American journalist was the Washington Post reporter who broke the story of the 1972 Watergate burglary, traced the financial payoffs to President Nixon, and wrote All the President's Men (1974) and The Final Days (1976) with Bob Woodward?
Carl Bernstein

(b. 1945) This political leader won the Nobel Peace Prize (1991) and was the daughter of another prominent political leader. She has been the leader of the National League for Democracy in Myanmar since 1988. She was held under house arrest from 1989 to 1995 when the ruling military government refused to recognize her party's victory in the 1990 elections. She was detained frequently thereafter. Name this politician whose NLD won a majority in 2015 but was barred from being president by clauses in Myanmar's constitution.
Aung San Suu Kyi

(b. 1945) What American paleontologist proposed that dinosaurs were both active and warm-blooded?
Robert T. Bakker

(b. 1946) What American long jumper set a world record at the 1968 Olympic Games that stood until 1991?
Bob Beamon

(b. 1948) Identify the Latvian-born American ballet dancer who defected to the West while touring with the Kirov Ballet and served as the American Ballet Theater's artistic director (1980--89).
Mikhail Baryshnikov

(b. 1949) What American pop singer and songwriter made hit songs like ``Piano Man'' (1973), ``Just the Way You Are'' (1977), ``Tell Her About It'' (1983), ``We Didn't Start the Fire'' (1989), and ``The River of Dreams'' (1993)?
Billy Joel

(b. 1952) The television sitcom of what American comedienne and actress was inspired by her renowned stand-up comedy persona?
Roseanne Barr

(b. 1964) What American baseball player won seven NL MVP awards, played for the Pirates and Giants, and eclipsed Hank Aaron's home run record in 2007?
Barry Bonds

(b. 1967) What German tennis player won the men's singles title at one US Open, one Australian Open, and three Wimbledon tournaments from 1985 to 1991?
Boris Becker

(c. 1825--1903) What American frontiersman named himself ``justice of the peace'' in Val Verde County, Texas, where he held court in his saloon, the Jersey Lilly --- so-named for actress Lillie Langtry?
Roy Bean

(Calixtus III, 29 Jun. 1456) What bull titled Bulla turcorum announced the Fall of Constantinople and ordered a ``Noon Bell'' prayer to protect against a threatened Ottoman invasion?
Cum his superioribus annis

(c. 330--79, feast day: 14 June) What Doctor of the Church, bishop of Caesarea, and brother of St. Gregory of Nyssa staunchly opposed the Arian heresy and established a monastic rule that is still the basis of monasticism in the Eastern Church?
St. Basil

(c. 673--735, feast day: 27 May) What English monk, theologian, and historian wrote The Ecclesiastical history of the English people (Latin, completed in 731), a primary source for early English history?
St. Bede

(c. 1214--94) What English philosopher, scientist, and Franciscan monk is most noted for his work in optics and emphasized the need for an empirical approach to scientific study?
Roger Bacon

(c. 1400--55) What Italian painter and Dominican friar painted the frescos in the convent of San Marco, Florence and was beatified by Pope John Paul II?
Fra Angelico/Guido di Pietro

(c. 1450--1500) Identify the Portuguese navigator and explorer who was the first European to sail around the Cape of Good Hope (1488), thereby establishing a sea route from the Atlantic Ocean to Asia.
Bartolomeu Dias

(c. 1472--1517) Name the Italian painter and Dominican friar who worked chiefly in Florence and painted The Vision of St. Bernard (1507) and The Mystic Marriage of St. Catherine (1511).
Fra Bartolommeo

(c. 1483--1546) What Barbary pirate born Khair ad-Din was notorious for his successes against Christian vessels in the eastern Mediterranean Sea?
Barbarossa

(c. 1584--1622) What English navigator and explorer was the pilot of several expeditions searching for the Northwest Passage 1612--16 and discovered the largest island of the Canadian Arctic in 1616, now named after him?
William Baffin

(c. 1778--1842) What Chilean revolutionary leader and statesman led the army that defeated Spanish forces in 1817 with José de San Martín and paved the way for Chilean independence the following year?
Bernardo O'Higgins

What group of American realist painters painted scenes from the slums of New York and grew out of the group called ``The Eight''?
Ashcan School

(Clement V, 6 May 1312) What bull stated the conditions of Franciscan rule?
Exivi de paradiso

(Clement V, 22 Mar. 1312) What bull formally dissolved the Knights Templar?
Vox in excelso

(Clement V, 1308) What bull set out the procedure to prosecute the Knights Templar?
Faciens misericordiam `Granting forgiveness'

(Clement VII, 8 May 1529) The bull Intre arcana granted permissions and privileges to what emperor and the Spanish Empire, including patronage power over their lands in the Americas?
Charles V

(Clement VIII, 28 Feb. 1592) What bull forbade Jews to trade new commodities in public places?
Cum saepe accidere

(Clement VIII, 1593) What bull expelled Jews from the Papal States?
Caeca et obdurata `The blind and obdurate'

(d. 1381) What English rebel was a priest who preached an egalitarian social message but was excommunicated and imprisoned for heresy, and following the Peasants' Revolt was hanged as a traitor?
John Ball

(Egyptian mythology) What god depicted as a bull symbolized fertility and strength in war?
Apis

(Eugene IV, 6 Jul. 1439) What bull officially reunited the Roman Catholic Church with the Eastern Orthodox Churches, an agreement quickly repudiated by most eastern bishops?
Laetentur caeli `Rejoicing of the heavens'

(Eugene IV, 8 Aug. 1442) What bull advocated the complete social separation of Jews and Christians and created a legal basis for creating Jewish ghettos in Europe?
Dundum ad nostram audientiam

(Eugene IV, 1435) What bull forbade the slavery of local natives in the Canary Islands by Spanish slave traders?
Sicut dudum

(flor. 6th century) What Greek philosopher and scientist believed that earth was flat and shallow, a retrograde step from Anaximander?
Anaximenes

(Greek mythology) To what god, son of Zeus and Leto and brother of Artemis and associated with music, poetic inspiration, archery, prophecy, medicine, pastoral life, and the sun, was the sanctuary at Delphi dedicated?
Apollo

(Greek mythology) What wife of Hector became the slave of Neoptolemus (Achilles's son) after Troy's fall?
Andromache

What is apsara?
celestial nymph, typically the consort of a gandharva or heavenly musician

(John XXII, 31 Mar. 1317) What bull negated any imperial-bestowed titles that were not confirmed by the Pope?
Si fratrum

(John XXII, Oct. 1317) What bull reiterated Clement V's bull on Franciscan rule?
Quorundam exigit

(Julius III, 25 Feb. 1551) The bull Super specula militantis Ecclesiae `Upon the watchtower of the Church Militant' ended the status of what diocese as the largest in the world, the birthplace of Cristiano Ronaldo?
Funchal

(Leo X, 15 Jun. 1520) What bull demanded that Martin Luther retract 41 of his 95 theses, as well as other specified errors, within sixty days of its publication in neighbouring regions to Saxony?
Exsurge Domine

(Leo X, 19 Dec. 1513) What bull excoriated a twofold doctrine on the immortality of the soul?
Apostolici Regiminis

(Leo X, 1514) What bull renewed Nicholas V's Dum diversas of 1452?
Precelse denotionis

(Martin V, 1 Mar. 1420) What bull called for a crusade against followers of Jan Hus, John Wycliffe, and other heretics and initiated the Hussite Wars?
Omnium plasmatoris Domini

(Nicholas V, 18 Jun. 1452) What bull authorized Afonso V of Portugal to reduce any Saracens, pagans, or other enemies of Christ to perpetual slavery?
Dum diversas

(Nicholas V, 30 Sept. 1453) What bull called for a crusade to reverse the fall of Constantinople?
Etsi ecclesia Christi

(Paul II, 19 Apr. 1470) What bull declared that a Jubilee would take place every 25 years?
Ineffabilis providentia

(Paul III, 2 Jun. 1537) What bull forbade the enslavement of Native Americans and all others?
Sublimis Deus

(Paul III, 27 Sept. 1540) The bull Regimini militantis ecclesiae, and later Exposcit debitum (Julius III, 21 Jul. 1542), approved the formation of what society?
Societas Iesu `Society of Jesus'

(Paul IV, 14 Jul. 1555) What bull revoked all rights of the Jewish community and placed religious and economic restrictions on Jews in the Papal States, renewing anti-Jewish legislation and subjecting Jews to various degradations and restrictions on their freedom?
Cum nimis absurdum `Since it is absurd'

(Pius II, 14 Jan. 1460) What bull called for a three-year crusade against the Ottoman Empire?
Ecclesiam Christi

(Pius II, 28 Apr. 1462) What bull prohibited the destruction or removal of the ancient ruins in Rome and Campagna?
Cum almam nostram urbem

A basset horn is an alto clarinet in what key?
F

A bhikkhu is what kind of Buddhist monk?
Theravada

A series of anti-government uprisings in various countries in North Africa and the Middle East began in December 2010. What name is associated with these uprisings, and in what country did they commence?
Arab Spring; Tunisia

How many buttons does a traditional Roman cassock have?
33

Aeterni regis, a bull promulgated by Sixtus IV in 1481, confirmed what treaty that put an end to the War of the Castilian Succession?
Treaty of Alcáçovas

Along what long threadlike part of a neuron are impulses conducted from the cell body to other cells?
axon

Arkhangelsk is a port on the White Sea in Russia named after the monastery of what archangel there?
Michael

What lake is south of Aswan?
Lake Nasser

At what Anglo-French battle in 1346 did the forces of Edward III defeated those of Philip VI, marking the first major English victory of the Hundred Years War?
Battle of Crécy

At what American national park on the Rio Grande, Texas, were fossil remains of the pterosaur found?
Big Bend National Park

Of what is athlete's foot a form?
ringworm

How many hours is Atlantic Standard Time, including the easternmost parts of mainland Canada, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands, behind Greenwich Mean Time?
four

Where did bachata, a style of romantic music, originate?
Dominican Republic

Who formed Ballets Russes in Paris in 1909?
Sergei Diaghilev

On what waterway that is formed by the junction of the Ping and Nan Rivers is Bangkok located?
Chao Phraya

To how many words is Basic English is limited?
850

Whose Benedictus Deus ratified all decrees and definitions of the Council of Trent on 26 January 1564?
Pius IV

Complete this proverb which means `` if a rival or enemy shows one generosity or kindness, one should be suspicious of their motives": beware of [---] bearing gifts.
Greeks [with allusion to Virgil's Aeneid (ii. 49), which recounts the story of the Trojan Horse]

Complete this proverb, meaning ``even the best person sometimes makes a mistake due to a momentary lack of alertness or attention": even [---] nods.
Homer [with allusion to Latin dormitat Homerus (Horace Ars Poetica 359)]

Einstein said that he did not stand on the shoulders of Newton, but rather whom?
James Clerk Maxwell

Whose 79 statements did Ex omnibus afflictionibus of Pius V condemn?
Michael Baius

For what antisemitic canard, the topic of two papal bulls by Innnocent IV (Divina justitia nequaquam, Lachrymabilem Judaeorum) that urged its end, were many Jews murdered and persecuted in Europe?
blood libel

For what three teams did Bobby Hull play?
Chicago Blackhawks, Winnipeg Jets, Hartford Whalers

From the Italian for 1`fair sight,'' what word is used for a summerhouse or open-sided gallery, usually at rooftop level, commanding a fine view?
belvedere

From what in Sanskrit does ``rupee'' derive its name?
wrought silver

From what is Arnel made?
cellulose triacetate

From what podium or platform in a synagogue are the Torah and Prophets read?
bimah

From where did Archimedes hail?
Syracuse

From where did Celsius hail?
Sweden

From where does the word Armageddon come?
Greek from Hebrew har mĕgiddōn `hill of Megiddo' (Rev. 16.16)

General George Custer and his forces were defeated by Sioux and Cheyenne warriors on 25 June 1876 in this battle. Identify the conflict that is popularly known as Custer's Last Stand.
Battle of Little Bighorn

Gregory IX issued the bull Parens scientiarum on 13 Apr. 1231, guaranteeing the independence and self-governance of what institution of higher learning where the pope studied theology?
University of Paris

For what is ``Gulag'' an acronym?
Chief Administration for Corrective Labour Camps

How many dogmatic decrees comprised the documents of the Council of Trent?
17

How many member countries comprise the Asian Development Bank?
47

How many piano sonatas did Beethoven compose?
thirty-two

How many players are on a team in Australian rules football?
eighteen

How many stars form the Big Dipper?
seven

How many string quartets did Beethoven compose?
sixteen

How many Wimbledon titles did Billie Jean King win?
twenty (six singles, ten doubles, and four mixed doubles)

Identify either name used for an organelle that forms the base of a flagellum or cilium.
basal body/basal granule/kinetosome

Identify the 1917 battle and prolonged episode of trench warfare during World War I in Belgium that involved an appalling loss of life and called alternatively the ``Third Battle of Ypres.''
Battle of Passchendaele

Identify the city at the mouth of the Amazon that is the capital of Pará and Brazil's chief commercial centre.
Belém

Identify the collective name for Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands.
Benelux

Identify the English-born American architect who designed buildings in Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Washington, DC, and rebuilt the Capitol (1815--17) after its destruction by the British.
Benjamin Henry Latrobe

Identify the informal language or code used on the internet in which standard letters are often replaced by numerals or special characters that resemble the letters in appearance.
leetspeak (1337speak)

(feast day: 11 July) Identify the Italian hermit who established a monastery at Monte Cassino and whose Regula Monachorum formed the basis of Western monasticism.
St. Benedict

Identify the state proclaimed in 1967 when part of southeastern Nigeria and evanesced by 1970 that was inhabited chiefly by the Igbo people and sought independence from the rest of the country.
Biafra

Identify the yellow to brown mineral consisting of a fluoride and carbonate of cerium and other rare earth metals whose name comes from a district in Västmanland, Sweden.
bastnaesite

Identify three of Astana's former names.
Nur-Sultan, Akmola, Tselinograd

In 1485, Bosworth Field was fought. Henry Tudor defeated and killed the Yorkist king Richard III, which enabled him to take the throne as Henry VII. What war saw this battle?
Wars of the Roses

In ballet, it is a posture in which the body is supported on one leg, with the other leg extended horizontally backward. In music, it is a passage or composition with fanciful ornamentation of the melody. Alternatively, it is an ornamental design consisting of intertwined flowing lines, originally found in Arabic or Moorish decoration.
arabesque

In QCD natural units, what is the mass of a proton?
$\sim$ 1 GeV

In what 479 BC battle during the Persian Wars were the Persian forces defeated by the Greeks in Boeotia?
Battle of Plataea

In what 1812 battle in the namesake village did Napoleon's forces defeat the Russian army?
Battle of Borodino

In what battle in 1805 in the modern-day Czech Republic did Napoleon defeat the Austrians and Russians?
Battle of Austerlitz

In what battle that took place near Stirling, Scotland in 1314 was the English army of Edward II, advancing to break the siege of Stirling Castle, defeated by the Scots under Robert the Bruce?
Battle of Bannockburn

In what billiards-derived indoor table game are small balls hit and then allowed to roll down a sloping board on which there are holes, each numbered with the score achieved if a ball goes into it, with pins acting as obstructions?
bagatelle

In what bird organ was the B cell first identified?
bursa

In what celebratory wedding procession in parts of India and Pakistan is the groom escorted, traditionally on horseback, to the wedding site?
baraat

In what country can you find Dousti Square and Karakul Lake?
Tajikistan

In what country can you find the governorates Hasaka, Deir ez-Zor, and Homs?
Syria

In what cylindrical sac do the spores of ascomycetes develop?
ascus

In what English Civil War battle fought in 1644 near York were the Royalists defeated, fatally weakening Charles I's cause?
Battle of Marston Moor

In what gambling card game do players hold two- or three-card hands, the winning hand being that giving the highest remainder when its face value is divided by ten?
baccarat

In what German town in the Bavarian Alps did Hitler have a fortified retreat?
Berchtesgaden

In what hair-highlighting technique is dye painted on in such a way as to create a graduated, natural-looking effect?
balayage

In what kind of mimicry is an edible animal protected by its resemblance to a noxious one that predators avoid?
Batesian mimicry

In what mountain range is Mount Rushmore?
Black Hills

In what Pacific Ocean arm northeast of New Guinea and north of New Britain did the United States destroy a large Japanese naval force in March 1943?
Bismarck Sea

In what part of a bell tower or steeple are the bells housed?
belfry

In what process does an electron in an atom's outer shell make a transition to a vacancy in an inner shell, the energy gained transferred to an electron that escapes from the atom?
Auger effect

In what town did Beaver Tails originate?
Killaloe

In what town is Wagner buried?
Bayreuth

In what two-player card game is the object to acquire the opponent's cards by alternately turning cards up, the other player having to find an honour within a specified number of turns or else forfeit the cards already played if an honour is revealed?
beggar-my-neighbour

In what village did Buddha attain enlightenment?
Bodhgaya

In what year did Niels Bohr win the Nobel Prize for Physics?
1922

In what year did the Black Death reach England?
1348

Innocent X condemned five propositions of what primarily French movement that emphasized original sin in the bull Cum occasione on 31 May 1653?
Jansenism

Innocent XI condemned what mystic movement as heresy with the bull Coelestis Pastor in 1687?
Quietism

Into what sea does the Arno empty?
Ligurian Sea

Name the three Fates (Moriai) of Greek mythology.
Clotho `spinner,' Lachesis `allotter,' Atropos `the unturnable'

Of what broad bay is Lagos the chief port?
Bight of Benin

Of what is an arctophile fond?
teddy bears

Of what two substances is aspartame a derivative?
aspartic acid, phenylalanine

On what date was the Bastille stormed, marking the start of the French Revolution?
14 July 1789

On what hill in ancient Athens did the highest governmental council and later a judicial court meet?
Areopagus

On what movable frame is a coffin or corpse placed before burial or cremation?
bier

On what pad containing optical fibres connected to a light source may a young baby be laid for jaundice treatment?
biliblanket

On what river does Asunción lie?
Paraguay River

On what river is Arnhem situated?
Rhine

On what river is Baghdad?
Tigris

On what river is Basle located?
Rhine

On what river is Baton Rouge located?
Mississippi River

On what rivers is Belgrade situated?
Danube, Sava

On what water body is Biarritz located?
Bay of Biscay

One hundred and forty-six English prisoners were confined overnight here following the capture of the location's city by the nawab of Bengal. Identify the dungeon in which only twenty-three of these soldiers were alive the following day.
Black Hole of Calcutta

She was the daughter of King Minos of Crete and Pasiphaë. Name this figure of Greek mythology who helped Theseus escape from the Minotaur's labyrinth by giving him a ball of thread.
Ariadne

Si vera sunt `If they are true,' a bull issued by Gregory IX on 20 Jun. 1239, ordered the seizure and examination of Jewish writings, mostly this text, suspected of blasphemies against Christ and the Church.
Talmud

Sixtus IV authorized what sovereigns of Aragon to appoint inquisitors in 1478 with the bull Exigit sincerae devotionis, creating the Spanish Inquisition?
Ferdinand, Isabella

Sixtus IV ordered the taxation of Roman Jews at a tithe during the Turkish war and a carnival tax of how much in a bull promulgated on 21 Feb. 1472?
1,100 gulden

Someone or something in a state of total confusion or disarray is at what numerical phrase?
at sixes and sevens

Someone that is au courant is what?
well informed

Supernae dispositionis arbitrio, promulgated by this pope in 1514, called for reform of the curia and declared that cardinals should come immediately after the pope in the ecclesiastical hierarchy.
Leo X

The 1738 bull In eminenti apostolatus specula of Clement XII banned Catholics from becoming what?
Freemasons

The analects is a book of an extensive collection of sayings and ideas attributed to what philosopher?
Confucius

The Appian Way was originally built from Rome to another town by Appius Claudius Caecus in 312 BC. It was later extended to a different town. What are these two towns?
Capua, Brindisi

The Arc of Triumph, a monument in Baghdad formed by two swords, alludes to a famous battle fought in 636 in what historical city?
al-Qādisiyyah

The Balkan Wars were two wars fought over the last European territories (Albania, Macedonia, and Constantinople) of what empire?
Ottoman Empire

The bull Postremo mense superioris anni of what pope restated and developed certain aspects of Catholic Church teaching on baptizing Jewish children without parental consent and the forcible removal of baptized Jewish children from their families, confirming a 1597 decision of Roman Curia?
Benedict XIV

The ``Cadaver Synod'' is the name commonly given to the ecclesiastical trial of what pope who had been dead for about 7 months before the trial?
Formosus

The cautionary letter Audi filia et was written by either Urban IV or Clement IV in the 1260s to what queen, admonishing her for inappropriate actions?
Plaisance of Cyprus (or another Cypriot queen)

The data structure that allows for searches, sequential access, insertions, and deletions in $O(\log n)$ time is what type of tree where all terminal nodes are the same distance from the base and all non-terminal nodes have between $n$ and $2n$ subtrees?
B-tree

The death and resurrection of what youthful consort of Cybele in Anatolian mythology were associated with the spring festival?
Attis

On what modern-day resort island did Ponce de León think the legendary Fountain of Youth was?
Bimini

The name for what small, decorative ornament or trinket comes from the French for ``beautiful''?
bibelot

The name of what basic monetary unit of Panama equal to 100 centésimos comes from a Spanish explorer?
balboa

The name of what ceremonial canopy of stone, metal, or fabric over an altar, throne, or doorway comes from the Italian for ``Baghdad": the place of origin of the brocade?
baldachin

The name of what criminal organization originating and operating chiefly in Calabria derives from the Greek for ``heroism''?
'Ndrangheta

The name of what dessert containing gelatin and whipped cream and served cold comes from the French for a German state?
bavarois

The name of what fine, unbleached knitted cotton fabric used for stockings and underwear comes from the town in Ireland where it was originally made?
balbriggan

The name of what fragrant medicinal resin obtained from specific trees has biblical origin?
balm of Gilead

The name of what industrial city on the Yellow River in Inner Mongolia originates from a Mongolic phrase meaning ``deer city''?
Baotou

The name of what kind of embroidery, also called flame stitch, typically worked on upholstery fabrics in stitch patterns suggestive of flames comes from a palace in Florence?
Bargello

The name of what light, silky dress fabric resembling gauze and typically made from wool comes from the French village where it was originally made?
barège

The name of what loose overcoat with raglan sleeves comes from an estate near Inverness in Scotland?
balmacaan

The name of what Nigerian militant Islamic fundamentalist group comes from Hausa for ``western education'' + Arabic for ``forbidden''?
Boko Haram

The name of what small, showy trinket or decoration comes from the Old French for ``child's toy''?
bauble

The name of what surgical knife with a long, narrow, straight or curved blade comes from the French for ``dagger''?
bistoury

The octonions are sometimes referred to as this English mathematician's numbers.
Arthur Cayley

The papal bull Grandi non immerito `With good reason' of Innocent IV removed whom from the Portuguese throne, replacing him with his brother Afonso?
Sancho II

The papal bull Querentes in agro, promulgated by Innocent IV on 6 October 1254, recognized what institution of higher learning and ``confirmed its liberties, ancient customs, and approved statutes''?
University of Oxford

The spacetime diagram named after what German physicist depicts spacetime on a two-dimensional plane (with time on the horizontal axis and distance on the vertical axis) and has units such that for one unit in time, light travels one unit in space?
Hermann Minkowski

The specific case involved sending antiwar pamphlets to drafted men. What Supreme Court case ruled that the freedom of speech protection afforded in the United States Constitution's First Amendment may be restricted if the words spoken or printed represented to society a ``clear and present danger''?
Schenck v. United States (1919)

The wailing of what female spirit of Irish legend warns of an impending death in a house?
banshee

The western part of what Bahraini city is inhabited by many of Bahrain's ministers and ruling family?
Riffa

The word for this method of producing coloured designs on textiles by dyeing them comes from the Javanese for ``painted.''
batik

Théodore Rousseau led this group of artists. It was named after a small village in the forest of Fontainebleau, near Paris, where Rousseau and others worked. Identify this mid-nineteenth-century school of French landscape painters that reacted against classical conventions, based their art on the direct study of nature, and included Charles Daubigny and Jean-François Millet.
Barbizon School

These uninhabited islands in the Indian Ocean form an external territory of Australia. Captain Nash discovered the first island in 1800 and named it after his ship. The second island was discovered by a captain of the same name on HMS Hibernia in 1811. Identify this territory.
Ashmore and Cartier Islands

This apostolic letter was issued against Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II by Innocent IV during the Council of Lyon on 17 Jul. 1245. Name this letter which set forth the crimes of which Frederick was guilty and that Innocent, desiring to have a restoration of peace in places distracted by dissensions, sent three legates to Frederick as the begetter of these evils.
Ad apostolicae dignitatis apicem

This autonomous region of north-eastern Spain is bounded on the north by the Pyrenees and east by Catalonia and Valencia. Formerly, it was an independent kingdom that was united with Catalonia in 1137 and Castile in 1479. Name this region.
Aragon

This battle took place in 778 at a mountain pass in the Pyrenees in northern Spain. The rearguard of Charlemagne's army was attacked by the Basques and massacred; one of the nobles, Roland, was killed, an event celebrated in the Chanson de Roland (in which the attackers are wrongly identified as the Moors). Identify this battle.
Battle of Roncesvalles

This battle took place in 1745, just east of Edinburgh. It was the first significant engagement of the Jacobite uprising. The Jacobites routed the Hanoverians, leaving the way clear for Charles Edward Stuart's subsequent invasion of England. Name this conflict.
Battle of Prestonpans

This battle was fought in 1870 in northeastern France. The Prussian army defeated a smaller French army under Napoleon III, opening the way for a Prussian advance on Paris and marking the French Second Empire's end. Name this conflict.
Battle of Sedan

This battle was fought on 18 June 1815 in modern-day Belgium. Napoleon's army was defeated by the British (under the Duke of Wellington) and Prussians. The allied pursuit caused Napoleon's army to disintegrate entirely, ending his bid to return to power. Identify this renowned conflict.
Battle of Waterloo

This battle, named after a nearby river, was fought in Ireland in 1690. The Protestant army of William of Orange, the newly crowned William III, defeated the Catholic army (including troops from both France and Ireland) led by the recently deposed James II. Name this battle, whose result is celebrated annually (on 12 July) in Northern Ireland as a victory for the Protestant cause.
Battle of the Boyne

This Charles Perrault character killed several wives in turn for disobeying his order to avoid a locked room, which contained the bodies of his previous wives. Local Breton tradition identifies what character with Gilles de Rais (c. 1400--40), a perpetrator of atrocities, although he had only one wife?
Bluebeard

This conflict was fought in 1685 in Somerset. The forces of the rebel Duke of Monmouth, who had landed in Dorset as a champion of the Protestant cause and pretender to the throne, were decisively defeated by James II's troops. Name this battle.
Battle of Sedgemoor

This decisive battle of the Anglo-Scottish war of 1513 was fought on the battle's namesake hill near the Northumbrian village of Branxton. A Scottish army under James IV was defeated by a smaller but better-led English force and suffered heavy losses, including the king and most of his nobles. Identify this battle.
Battle of Flodden

This decisive battle was fought in 1066. William the Conqueror defeated the forces of the Anglo-Saxon king Harold II. Harold died in the battle, leaving the way open for the Norman Conquest of England. Identify this infamous event.
Battle of Hastings

This decisive Civil War battle was fought in Pennsylvania in July 1863. A Union army under General Meade repulsed the Confederate army of General Lee and forced him to abandon his invasion of the north. Identify this battle.
Battle of Gettysburg

This decisive naval battle fought in 1827 off Pylos in Peloponnesus was part of the Greek struggle for independence from the Ottoman Empire. Britain, Russia, and France sent a combined fleet that destroyed the Egyptian and Turkish fleet. Name this battle.
Battle of Navarino

This decisive naval battle was fought on 21 October 1805 off the south coast of Spain during the Napoleonic Wars. The British fleet under Horatio Nelson (who was killed in action) defeated the combined fleets of France and Spain, which were attempting to clear the way for Napoleon's projected invasion of Britain. Name this battle.
Battle of Trafalgar

This emperor of India circa 269--232 BC converted to Buddhism and made it the state religion. Name the emperor who now has a pillar at Sarnath, Uttar Pradesh, with four lions, marking where the Buddha publicly preached his doctrine.
Ashoka

This final engagement of the Jacobite uprising of 1745--46 was fought on 16 April on a moor near Inverness. Under the Duke of Cumberland, the Hanoverian army crushed the small and poorly supplied Jacobite army of Charles Edward Stuart. A ruthless pursuit after the battle effectively prevented any chance of saving the Jacobite cause. What is this battle's name?
Battle of Culloden

This goddess was the daughter of Zeus and the sister of Apollo. Name this huntress typically depicted with a bow and arrows.
Artemis

This group of writers, artists, and philosophers included Virginia Woolf, Lytton Strachey, Vanessa Bell, Duncan Grant, and Roger Fry. Its members were known for their unconventional lifestyles and attitudes and were a powerful force in the growth of modernism. Name this early--twentieth-century group.
Bloomsbury Group

This man worked for The New York Times from 1951, serving as its president from 1963 until 1979. Name this American publisher responsible for modernizing and broadening the newspaper's editorial range and reorganizing the staff and day-to-day operations.
Arthur Ochs Sulzberger

This naval battle was fought in 1571 at the entrance to the Gulf of Corinth. The Christian forces of Rome, Venice, and Spain defeated a sizeable Turkish fleet, ending for the time being Turkish naval domination in the eastern Mediterranean. Name this battle.
Battle of Lepanto

This polyunsaturated fatty acid is present in animal fats, helps synthesize prostaglandins and leukotrienes, and is an essential constituent of the diet. What is its name?
arachidonic acid

This queen offered her hair for the safe return of her husband (Ptolemy III) from an expedition. Her hair was stolen and, according to legend, placed in the heavens. Name this Egyptian queen who has a constellation named after her and her hair.
Berenice

This significant battle of the English Civil War took place in 1645 in Northamptonshire. The Royalist army of Prince Rupert and King Charles I was decisively defeated by the New Model Army under General Thomas Fairfax (1612--71) and Oliver Cromwell. Identify this conflict.
Battle of Naseby

This significant naval World War In battle was fought between the British Grand Fleet under Admiral Jellicoe and the German High Seas Fleet in the North Sea. Although the battle was indecisive, the German fleet never again sought a full-scale engagement, and the Allies retained control of the North Sea. Identify this conflict.
Battle of Jutland

This American cyclist won the Tour de France in 1999 after battling testicular cancer and won the race for the next six years. Name this cyclist who was stripped of his titles for using PEDs.
Lance Armstrong

This woman of Colophon in Lydia was a skillful weaver who challenged Athena to a contest. When Athena destroyed her work, she tried to hang herself, but Athena turned her into a spider. Name this figure of Greek mythology.
Arachne

This World War II battle was fought 90 km west of Alexandria in 1942. The German Afrika Korps under Rommel was halted in its advance toward the Nile by the British Eighth Army under Montgomery, giving the British a decisive victory. What is this battle's name?
Battle of El Alamein

To what Angolan port and railroad terminal, the namesake of a cold ocean current flowing from Antarctica, is copper brought from Zambia and the Democratic Republic of Congo?
Benguela

To what country is argan oil native?
Morocco

To what order do even-toed ungulates belong?
Artiodactyla

To what party did Tony Blair (prime minister 1997--2007) belong?
Labour

To whom did Sixtus V grant the monopoly of silk manufacture in the Papal States for sixty years by inviting him to introduce his process of extracting silk thread from the cocoon twice a year?
Meir Magino di Gabriel

Two dams in Egypt are located near what city on the Nile?
Aswan

Two major semipermanent areas of high pressure happen over what two island groups (--- High)?
Bermuda, Azores

What abbreviation is used to indicate a date reckoned from 753 BC, the year of the foundation of Rome?
AUC (ab urbe condita `from the foundation of the city')

What accumulation of fluid in the peritoneal cavity causes abdominal swelling?
ascites

What acronym denotes a set of computer instructions in firmware that control input and output operations?
BIOS

What adjective defined as ``illusory or imaginary and therefore disappointing'' comes from the Arabic for a prince in the Arabian Nights who gave a beggar a feast consisting of ornate but empty dishes?
Barmecide

What adjective denotes or relates to a style of furniture and interior decoration current in Germany from 1815 to 1848, one characterized by restraint, conventionality, and utilitarianism?
Biedermeier

What adjective describes a growth or development downward toward the base or point of attachment?
basipetal

What adjective describes a rod-shaped structure?
bacilliform/bacillary

What adjective describes a year having the extra day (29 February) of a leap year?
bissextile

What adjective describes an ancient Greek phrase that lacks the acute accent on the last syllable?
barytone

What adjective describes crustacean limbs and antennae that divide to form two branches?
biramous

What adjective describes something bearing berries?
baccate

What adjective describes something having two different refractive indices?
birefringent

What adjective describes something that produces an unintentional effect of anticlimax?
bathetic

What adjective describes two-dimensional images that may be perceived as three-dimensional without the need for special optical equipment?
autostereoscopic

What adjective describes somehthing ``involving the agreement or cooperation of two political parties that usually oppose each other's policies''?
bipartisan

What adjective is used to describe a crystal structure in which there is an atom at each vertex and at the center of the unit cell?
body-centred

What adjective meaning ``having an end or purpose in itself'' comes from the Greek for ``self'' + ``end''?
autotelic

What adjective meaning vigilant comes from a watchman in Greek mythology with a hundred eyes?
Argus-eyed

What adjective means taking place every other year?
biennial

What adjective relates to something's centre of gravity?
barycentric

What adjective relates to/denotes a category or form that expresses how a verb denotes time?
aspectual

What Albertan river flows into the fourth-largest lake of Canada with the same name and has a river valley with large oil tar deposits?
Athabasca River

What alcoholic liquor, whose name comes from the Arabic for ``sweat,'' is typically distilled from the sap of coconut palm or rice?
arrack

What Algonquian people that live chiefly in the north-central plains region of the United States are called ``Gros Ventre'' as well?
Atsina

What alliance between the intelligence agencies of Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the UK, and the US is used to share information of political or military value?
Five Eyes

What alloy, containing gold or silver with a predominating amount of copper or other base metal, was formerly used for coinage?
billon

What alternate name for the vernal equinox has a Greek mythological name?
First Point of Aries

What alternative name is given to Arabian Nights?
Thousand and One Nights

What American general who switched sides during the American Revolution made his name synonymous with ``traitor''?
Benedict Arnold

What American operatic contralto was the first black singer to perform at the New York Metropolitan Opera?
Marian Anderson

What American physicist (Nobel Prize 1977) contributed to solid-state physics by investigating magnetism and superconductivity and facilitated research on molecular interactions through his work on the spectroscopy of gases?
Philip Warren Anderson

What American physicist discovered the positron and won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1936 with Hess?
Carl David Anderson

What American revolutionary believed to have been either an escaped or freed slave was one of five colonists killed by British soldiers in the Boston Massacre on 5 March 1770?
Crispus Attucks

What amino acid is a constituent of most proteins, an essential nutrient in the diet of vertebrates, and encoded by the codons CGU, CGC, CGA, CGG, AGA, and AGG?
arginine

What amorphous clayey rock is the chief commercial ore of aluminum and named after the French village near which it was first found?
bauxite

What ancient Celtic fesitval is celebrated on May Day?
Beltane

What ancient Celtic people inhabited Gaul north of the Seine and Marne Rivers?
Belgae

What ancient country in central Asia corresponds to the northern part of modern Afghanistan?
Bactria

What ancient device is used for raising water by means of a spiral within a tube?
Archimedean screw

What ancient Hebrew liquid measure was equivalent to about forty litres or nine gallons?
bath

What ancient warship had two flies of oarsmen on each side?
bireme

What angel severs the soul from the body at death in Jewish and Islamic Mythology?
Azrael

What Antarctic glacier flows from the Queen Maud Mountains to the Ross Ice Shelf at the southern edge of the Ross Sea?
Beardmore Glacier

What antibiotic obtained from the bacterium Streptomyces verticillus is used to treat certain types of cancer?
bleomycin

What antipope promulgated Etsi doctoribus gentium, a bull denouncing the Talmud or any other Jewish book attacking Christianity?
Antipope Benedict XIII

What antituberculosis vaccine was developed by two namesake French bacteriologists?
BCG (Bacillus Calmette--Guérin)

(feast day: 29 June) What apostle called ``Saul of Tarsus'' or the ``Apostle of the Gentiles'' first opposed the followers of Jesus, but after a vision became one of the first major Christian missionaries and theologians?
St. Paul

(feast day: 30 November) What apostle and brother of St. Peter is associated with the X-shaped cross and the patron saint of Scotland and Russia?
St. Andrew 

What Arabic exclamation means ``in the name of Allah'' and is found at the beginning of the Quran?
bismillah

What archaic term was used for nitric acid?
aqua fortis `strong water'

What are analects?
collection of short literary or philosophical extracts (also analecta)

What are arcana?
secrets or mysteries

What is a Dirichlet character?
completely multiplicative, periodic function from $\bf Z$ to $\bf C$

What are the Big Five personality traits?
openness to experience, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, neuroticism

What are the endpoints of the Appalachian Trail?
Mt. Katahdin, ME, Springer Mountain, GA

What are the lyrics of a Dies Irae?
Dies irae, dies illa / Solvet saeclum in favilla / Teste David cum Sibylla / Quantus tremor est futurus / Quando iudex est venturus / Cuncta stricte discussurus

What are the sacred writings of Zoroastrianism called?
Avesta

What armed force was recruited by the British government to fight Sinn Fein in Ireland in 1920--21, their harsh methods causing an American and a British outcry?
Black and Tans

What Asian peninsula is bounded by the Black Sea, the Aegean, and the Mediterranean and forms the greater part of Turkey?
Anatolia

What asteroid discovered in 1845 is named after a Roman goddess associated with justice?
Astraea

What asymmetrical figure eight can be traced in the sky showing the position of the sun at the same standard time on successive days of a year?
analemma

What Athenian statesman and general commanded the Athenian army at the battle of Plataea?
Aristides the Just

What Australasian flycatcher (Microeca leucophaea) has a gray-brown back and whitish underside and constantly wags its white-edged tail?
Jacky winter

What Austrian emperor established Austria-Hungary in 1867?
Franz Josef

What Austrian-born actor and politician acted in movies like Conan the barbarian (1982), Terminator (1984), Kindergarten cop (1990), and True lies (1994) and was governor of California (2003--11)?
Arnold Schwarzenegger

What autonomous region and former principality of northwest Spain has its capital in Oviedo?
Asturias

What ``b'' word describes someone wearing eyeglasses?
bespectacled

What ballet movement involves one leg moving outward from the body and in again?
battement

What barbiturate used as a sedative and hypnotic is systematically named 5-ethyl-5-isopropylbarbituric acid and has the chemical formula C11H18N2O3?
Amytal

What barrier island in south-eastern Maryland and north-eastern Virginia is noted for its wild ponies?
Assateague Island

What Bashkir Republic river flows from the Urals to the Kama River?
Belaya River

What basic monetary unit of Ethiopia is equal to 100 cents?
birr

What basic monetary unit of Madagascar is equal to five iraimbilanja?
ariary

What basic monetary unit of Thailand is equal to 100 satangs?
baht

What basic monetary unit of Venezuela is equal to one hundred centimos?
bolivar

What bass lute has an extended neck and unstopped bass strings?
archlute

What bass-stringed instrument of the cittern family has a long neck and a scallop-shaped body?
bandora

What battle fought in 1704 saw Bavaria the English, under the Duke of Marlborough, defeat the French and Bavarians?
Battle of Blenheim

What battle of the Crimean War fought between Russia and an alliance of British, French, and Turkish forces in southern Crimea ended inconclusively and is chiefly remembered as the scene of the Charge of the Light Brigade?
Battle of Balaclava

What bay on the southwestern coast of Cuba was the scene of an unsuccessful attempt in 1961 by US-backed Cuban exiles to invade the country and overthrow Fidel Castro's regime?
Bay of Pigs

What beef dish is typically coated in pâté de foie gras, wrapped in puff pastry, and baked?
beef Wellington

What biblical figure was the youngest son of Jacob and Rachel?
Benjamin (Gen. 35.18)

What Biblical Hebrew phrase in Genesis 1.2 describes the condition of the earth (eretz) immediately before the creation of light in Genesis 1.3?
Tohu wa-bohu

What bishop of Laodicea in Asia Minor upheld the heretical doctrine that Jesus had a human body, soul, but not spirit, this being replaced by the divine Logos?
Apollinaris

What black, viscous mixture of hydrocarbons is obtained naturally or as a residue from petroleum distillation and used for road surfacing and roofing?
bitumen

What blunt, thick needle with a large eye is used primarily for drawing tape or cord through a hem?
bodkin

What body part is called ``the blind gut''?
cecum

What British middle-distance runner and neurologist became the first man to run a mile in under four minutes in May 1954?
Sir Roger Bannister

What British philosopher, mathematician, social reformer, and Nobel laureate (1950) collaborated with Whitehead on Principia Mathematica and expounded logical atomism in Our knowledge of the external world (1914) and neutral monism in The analysis of mind (1921)?
Bertrand Russell

What British sweet opaque gelatinous desert is made with cornstarch and milk?
blancmange

What brittle crystalline compound is found in bitter almonds and the stones of peaches, apricots, and other fruits?
amygdalin

What broad silk necktie is named after a town in southern England where an annual race meeting marked by formal dress is held?
ascot

What broom is made of twigs tied around a stick?
besom

What bug that feeds by sucking sap from plants reproduces rapidly (often producing live young without mating) and causes extensive damage to crops?
aphid

What bull called for the Second Crusade?
Quantum praedecessores

What bull did Gregory XIII promulgate on 24 Feb. 1582 to establish the Gregorian calendar?
Inter gravissimas `Among the most important'

What bull issued by Adrian IV, whose existence is disputed by scholars, gave English King Henry II lordship over Ireland?
Laudabiliter

What bull issued by Alexander III on 11 Sept. 1171/72 promoted the Northern Crusades against the pagan Estonians and Finns?
Non parum animus noster

What bull issued by Boniface VIII on 18 Nov. 1302 promulgated the doctrine Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus and declared that the Church must remain united?
Unam sanctam

What bull issued by Calixtus II circa 1120 protected the Jews who suffered from the hands of the participants in the First Crusade and was later confirmed by many other popes?
Sicut Judaeis

What bull issued by Clement V on 22 Nov. 1307 ordered the arrest of the Knights Templar and the confiscation of their possessions in support of Philip IV of France?
Pastoralis praeeminentiae

What bull issued by Gregory IX in 1233 marked the start of the Inquisition?
Licet ad capiendos

What bull issued by Gregory IX on 17 Nov. 1234 called for a crusade to the Holy Land and ordered Dominicans and Franciscans to preach in favour of it?
Rachel suum videns

Who issued the bull In generali concilio in 1218?
Honorius III

What bull issued by Honorius III in 1219 closed law schools in Paris and forbade the study of civil law?
Super speculam

What bull issued by Honorius III on 29 Nov. 1223 approved the Rule of St. Francis?
Solet annuere

What bull issued by Innocent II in 1139 endorsed the Knights Templar and was the first of three bulls in which the Knights Templar were given substantial rights and privileges?
Omne datum optimum `Every perfect gift' (Jas. 1.17)

What bull issued on 15 Feb. 1113 by Paschal II that recognized the establishment of the Knights Hospitaller and confirmed its independence and sovereignty is preserved in Valletta, Malta?
Pie postulatio voluntatis `The most pious request'

What bull of Leo X excommunicated Martin Luther?
Decet Romanum Pontificem

What bull of Sixtus V (October 1586) allowed Jews to settle in the Papal States, revoking Pius V's 1569 bull Hebraeorum gens sola?
Christiana pietas

What bull written by Nicholas II and issued on 13 April 1059 established cardinal-bishops as the pope's sole electors?
In nomine Domini

What Cambodian city, the capital of a province with the same name, was founded in the eleventh century by the Khmer Empire and is the site of Kamping Puoy Lake?
Battambang

What Canadian Conservative was prime minister (1920--21, 1926)?
Arthur Meighen

What Canadian river flows for 950 km from eastern Saskatchewan into Manitoba to join the Red River at Winnipeg?
Assiniboine River

What Canadian-born American executive in the cosmetics industry built up an international chain of beauty salons and an extensive cosmetics range?
Elizabeth Arden

What capital of Altai, Russia lies on the Ob River?
Barnaul

What capital of Madhya Pradesh was the site of a fatal leakage of poisonous gas from an American-owned pesticide factory in December 1984?
Bhopal

What capital of Mali lies on the Niger River?
Bamako

What central Greek department to the north of the Gulf of Corinth was a region of ancient Greece with its chief city in Thebes?
Boeotia

What channel separates Tasmania from mainland Australia?
Bass Strait

What chemical solution that changes colour in glucose and other reducing sugars is used in clinical urine tests for diabetes?
Benedict's solution

What Chicago Cubs shortstop and first baseman was known as Mr. Cub and inducted to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1977?
Ernie Banks

What chief city of the island of Negros, Philippines is a major port on the island's northwest coast?
Bacolod

What chief commercial and industrial city in Malawi is named after explorer David Livingstone's birthplace in Scotland?
Blantyre

What chief port of Colombia was founded in 1629 and lies at the mouth of the Magdalena River, near the Caribbean Sea?
Barranquilla

What child of Judenstein, a three-year-old boy said to have been ritually murdered (by blood libel) by the Jews of Rinn in 1462, was beatified in 1752 by Benedict XIV but not canonized?
Andreas Oxner

What Chinese cabbage is of a variety with smooth-edged tapering leaves?
bok choy

What chronic disease, endemic in Africa and South America, is caused by infestation with blood flukes (schistosomes)?
bilharzia

What city in northwestern Venezuela was founded in 1552 by Juan de Villegas as a headquarters and to have better control of the territory believed to be rich in gold?
Barquisimeto

What city in Punjab, Pakistan was the capital of a princely state ruled by the Abbasi family of Nawabs until 1955?
Bahawalpur

What city in southeastern France was the capital of a medieval kingdom of the same name, formed in the 10th century by the union of the kingdoms of Provence and Burgundy?
Arles

What city in southern Michigan is a centre of the cereal industry as the home of Kellogg Company?
Battle Creek

What city in southwestern England was founded by the Romans, who called it ``Aquae Sulis,'' and was a fashionable spa in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries?
Bath

What city in western North Carolina, a resort in the Blue Ridge Mountains, is the location of the Biltmore estate?
Asheville

What city is known as the ``Big Easy''?
New Orleans

What city on the Rhône in southeastern France was the residence of the popes during their exile from Rome (1309--77) and papal property until the French Revolution?
Avignon

What city was called ``Frunze'' from 1926 to 1991?
Bishkek

What class of echinoderms comprises starfish?
Asteroidea

What class of vertebrates comprises the birds?
Aves

What clear fluid fills the space in front of the eyeball between the lens and cornea?
aqueous humour

What collection of stories and romances tells the tales of Aladdin, Sinbad the Sailor, and Ali Baba, narrated by Scheherazade?
Arabian Nights

What colourless oily liquid present in coal tar is used in the manufacture of dyes, drugs, and plastics, was the basis of the earliest synthetic dyes, and has the chemical formula C6H5NH2?
aniline

What condition in which fungi (phylum Ascomycota) infect (commonly) the lungs is caused by the inhalation of spores from mouldy hay, also called farmer's lung?
aspergillosis

What condition involves the thickening and hardening of the walls of the arteries, occurring typically in old age?
arteriosclerosis

What condition is marked by an irregular or abnormal heartbeat?
arrhythmia

What condition is marked by severe pain in the chest caused by an inadequate blood supply to the heart?
angina pectoris

What conical structure of calcareous plates and muscles supports the rasping teeth of a sea urchin?
Aristotle's lantern

What constituent of some forms of steel is a solid carbon solution in a nonmagnetic form of iron, stable at high temperatures?
austenite

What convention promulgated the apostille?
Hague convention abolishing the requirement of legalisation for foreign public documents (1961)

What Costa Rican president worked to achieve peace in Central America, particularly in Nicaragua, and won the Nobel Peace Prize (1987)?
Oscar Arias Sanchez

What creamy sauce is made with butter, onions, or shallots, and vinegar or lemon juice and usually served with seafood dishes?
beurre blanc

What crossbow had a unique mechanism for drawing back and releasing the string?
arbalest

What culture of the southwestern United States formed the early stages of the Anasazi culture from the first century BC until 700?
Basket Makers

What cyclic derivative of urea and malonic acid has the chemical formula C4H4O3N2?
barbituric acid

(feast day: 11 June) What Cypriot Levite and apostle was the traditional founder of the Cypriot Church and martyred in Cyprus?
St. Barnabas

What Danish neoclassical sculptor created a statue of Jason (1803) in Rome and the tomb of Pius VII (1824--31)?
Bertel Thorvaldsen

What Danish novelist and short-story writer, also known by her pseudonym ``Isak Dinesen,'' is best known for Seven gothic tales (1934) and her autobiography Out of Africa (1937)?
Karen Blixen

What dark anatomical adjective refers to something or someone wicked or malevolent?
black-hearted

What dark, fine-grained volcanic rock sometimes displays a columnar structure and is typically composed largely of plagioclase with pyroxene and olivine?
basalt

What declaration of eight common principles in international relations drawn up by Churchill and FDR in August 1941 provided the ideological basis for the United Nations?
Atlantic Charter

What decorated dart is thrust into a bull's neck or shoulders during a bullfight?
banderilla

What decorative mark is worn in the middle of the forehead of Indian women?
bindi

What decretal sent by Gregory IX in June 1233 condemning the heresy of Luciferianism said to be rife in Germany and authorizing the preaching of a crusade against it was sent to Emperor Frederick II, King Henry VII of Germany, Archbishop Siegfried III of Mainz, his suffragans, Bishop Conrad II of Hildesheim, and the preacher Konrad von Marburg?
Vox in Rama `A voice in Ramah'

What deep-water Indonesian port found on southern Borneo on a delta near the junction of the Barito and Martapura rivers is the capital of South Kalimantan?
Banjarmasin

What dental film is used for X-raying the crowns of upper and lower teeth simultaneously and held in place by a tab between the teeth?
bitewing

What dessert of Middle Eastern origin is made of phyllo pastry filled with chopped nuts and soaked in honey?
baklava

What dessert pear of a juicy early-ripening variety has a name that comes from the American merchant who first distributed it?
Bartlett pear

What developmental disorder related to autism is characterized by a higher-than-average intellectual ability coupled with impaired social skills and restrictive, repetitive patterns of interest and activities?
Asperger's syndrome

What device abbreviated ``APU'' is used on aircraft to provide power while on the ground and start the main engines?
auxiliary power unit

What devotional form of worship in Hinduism is usually directed to Vishnu or Shiva, by whose grace salvation may be attained by all regardless of sex, caste, or class?
bhakti

What did ``ASSR,'' a sign for a type of administrative unit in the Soviet Union, abbreviate?
Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic

What did Solzhenitsyn say was the most important event of the twentieth century?
Nuremberg trials

What diet named after an American cardiologist is high in protein and fat, low in carbohydrates, and prescribed for weight loss?
Atkins diet

What disease causes inflammation of the nerves and heart failure and is caused by a deficiency of vitamin B1?
beriberi

What disease of cattle and other livestock transmitted by ticks affects the red blood cells and causes the passing of red or blackish urine, also called piroplasmosis?
babesiosis

What district of southeast France produces light red and white burgundy wines?
Beaujolais

What diving seabird whose name comes from the Old Norse for ``razorbill'' is found in northern oceans, typically with a black head and black and white underparts and comprises the diving birds of the family Alcidae (order Charadriiformes), particularly Pinguinus impennis, Plautus alle, and Alca torda (in picture)?
auk

What do the Greek roots dogmat-- and --dox mean?
opinion, tenet; from δόξα

What do the Greek roots ego-- and eg-- mean?
goat; from αἴξ (aix)

What do the Greek roots en-- and em-- mean?
in; from ἐν (en)

What do the Greek roots eo--, eos--, and eoso-- mean?
dawn, east; from Ἠώς/Ἕως

What do the Greek roots ep-- and epi-- mean?
upon; from ἐπί (epi)

What do the Greek roots etho--, eth--, ethi-- mean?
custom, habit; ἦθος (ēthos); ethology

What do the Greek roots haem--, hem-- mean?
blood; αἷμα (haima); haemophilia, hemoglobin

What do the Latin roots damn-- and --demn-- mean?
to inflict loss upon; from damnāre

What do the Latin roots deca--, dec--, deka--, and dek-- mean?
ten; from δέκα (deka) `ten'

What do the Latin roots doc-- and doct-- mean?
teach; from docere, doctus

What do the Latin roots duc-- and duct-- mean?
lead; from dux, ducis

What do the Latin roots ed-- and es-- mean?
eat; from edere, esus

What do the Latin roots em-- and empt-- mean?
buy; from emere, emptus

What do the Latin roots equ-- and --iqu-- mean?
even, level; from aequus

What do the Latin roots ex--, e--, ef-- mean?
from, out; ex; exclude, extend, extrude

What do the Latin roots exter--, extra-- mean?
outer; externus; exterior

What do the Latin roots f--, fat-- mean?
say, speak; fari, fatus; fate, infant, preface

What do the Latin roots fac--, --fic--, fact, --fect-- mean?
make; facere, factus; defect, factory, manufacture

What do the Latin roots fall--, --fell--, fals-- mean?
deceive; fallere, falsus; falsity, infallibility

What do the Latin roots fend--, fens-- mean?
strike; fendere, --fensus; defend, offense

What do the Latin roots fid--, fis-- mean?
faith, trust; fides, fidere, fisus; confidence, fidelity

What do the Latin roots find--, fiss-- mean?
split; findere, fissus; fission, fissures

What do the Latin roots flect--, flex-- mean?
bend; flectere, flexus; flexible, flexile, flexor, inflection

What do the Latin roots flig--, flict-- mean?
strike; fligere, flictus; conflict, inflict

What do the Latin roots flu--, flux-- mean?
flow; fluere, fluxus; effluent, fluency, influx

What do the Latin roots fod--, foss-- mean?
dig; fodere, fossus; fossil

What do the Latin roots frang--, --fring--, fract--, frag-- mean?
break; frangere, fractus; fracture, fragment, frangible, infringe

What do the Latin roots frater--, fratr-- mean?
brother; frater; fraternity

What do the Latin roots fric--, frict-- mean?
rub; fricare, frictus; dentifrice, friction

What do the Latin roots fruct--, frug-- mean?
fruit; frux, fructis; fructose

What do the Latin roots fug--, fugit-- mean?
flee; fugere; centrifuge, fugitive, refuge

What do the Latin roots fund--, fus-- mean?
pour; fundere, fusus; diffusion, effusion, fusion, profuse, profusion, transfusion, effusive

What do the Latin roots fung--, funct-- mean?
do; fungi, functus; function, fungibility

What do the Latin roots fur--, furt-- mean?
steal; fur, furare; furtive

What do the Latin roots ger--, gest-- mean?
bear, carry; gerere, gestus; digest, gestation

What do the Latin roots grad--, --gred--, gress-- mean?
walk, step, go; gradus, gradere, gressus; grade, regress

What do the Latin roots hab--, --hib--, habit--, --hibit-- mean?
have; habere, habitus; habit, prohibition

What do the Latin roots hal--, --hel-- mean?
breathe; halare, halatus; anhelation, inhale

What do the Latin roots haur--, haust-- mean?
draw; haurire, haustus; exhaustion

What do the Latin roots her--, hes-- mean?
cling; haerere, haesus; adhesive, coherent

What does ``AMR'' abbreviate?
antimicrobial resistance: The development by a disease-causing microbe, through mutation or gene transfer, of the ability to survive exposure to an antimicrobial agent that was previously an effective treatment

What does ``AMRAAM'' abbreviate?
advanced medium range air-to-air missile

What does ``amygdaloid'' mean?
almond-shaped

What does an anaphrodisiac drug do?
reduce sexual desire

What does an omnipresent, omnipotent, and omniscient being lack?
limitation

What does ``anabatic'' mean?
(of a wind) caused by local upward motion of warm air

What does ``anaclitic'' mean?
relating to or characterized by a strong emotional dependence on another or others

What does ``anamnestic'' mean?
denoting an enhanced reaction of the body's immune system to an antigen which is related to one previously encountered

What does ``ancillary'' mean?
providing necessary support to the primary activities or operation of an organization, system, etc.

What does ``androcentric'' mean?
focused or centered on men

What does ``androgynous'' mean?
partly male and partly female in appearance; of indeterminate sex

What does ``anechoic'' mean?
free from echo

What does ``aneuploid'' mean?
having an abnormal number of chromosomes in a haploid set

What does ``anfractuous'' mean?
sinuous or circuitous

What does ``ang moh'' mean?
white person

What does ``angulate'' mean?
(technical) hold, bend, or distort (a part of the body, especially of an animal) so as to form an angle or angles; (skiing) incline (the upper body) sideways and outward during a turn

What does ``annular'' mean?
circular

What does ``anodyne'' mean?
not likely to provoke dissent or offense; inoffensive, often deliberately so

What does ``aorist'' mean?
unqualified past tense of a verb without reference to duration or completion of the action, especially in Greek

What does ``apace'' mean?
swiftly, quickly

What does ``API'' abbreviate?
application programming interface: set of functions and procedures allowing the creation of applications that access the features or data of an operating system, application, or other service

What does ``apical'' mean in phonetics?
formed with the tip of the tongue (of a consonant)

What does ``apocryphal'' mean?
of doubtful authenticity, although widely circulated as being true

What does ``apodictic'' mean?
clearly established or beyond dispute

What does ``apostatize'' mean?
renounce a religious or political belief or principle

What does ``apotropaic'' mean?
supposedly having the power to avert evil influences or bad luck

What does ``approbate'' mean?
approve formally; sanction

What does ``APR'' abbreviate?
annual percentage rate, typically of interest on loans/credit

What does ``aquiline'' mean?
like an eagle

What does ``arcuate'' mean?
shaped like a bow; curved

What does ``argent'' mean?
silver; a heraldic tincture

What does ``ARM'' abbreviate?
adjustable-rate mortgage

What does ``armed'' mean in heraldry?
having claws, a beak, etc. of a specified tincture

What does ``arrabbiata'' mean?
denoting a spicy pasta sauce made with tomatoes and hot peppers (from Italian `angry')

What does Article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice allow?
commanders to carry out discretionary punishments without judicial proceedings

What does ``ASCII'' abbreviate?
American Standard Code for Information Interchange

What does ``ASEAN'' abbreviate?
Association of Southeast Asian Nations: a regional organization intended to promote economic cooperation and now comprising the countries of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam, Brunei, Laos, Myanmar, and Cambodia

What does ``ASIC'' abbreviate in electronics?
application-specific integrated circuit

What does ``asinine'' mean?
extremely stupid or foolish

What does ``asperse'' mean?
attack or criticize the reputation or integrity of

What does ``astute'' mean?
having or showing an ability to accurately assess situations or people and turn this to one's advantage

What does ``atas'' mean in Singlish?
sophisticated or elegant

What does ``atrabilious'' mean?
melancholy or ill-tempered

What does ``ATV'' abbreviate?
all-terrain vehicle

What does ``auld lang syne'' mean?
times long past

What does ``auricular'' mean?
relating to the ear or hearing

What does ``austere'' mean?
severe or strict in manner, attitude, or appearance

What does ``avant-garde'' mean?
new and unusual or experimental ideas, especially in the arts, or the people introducing them

What does ``AWACS'' abbreviate?
airborne warning and control system

What does ``AWOL'' abbreviate?
absent without (official) leave

What does ``B \& B'' abbreviate?
bed and breakfast

What does ``B \& E'' abbreviate?
breaking and entering

What does ``BASIC'' abbreviate?
Beginners' All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code

What does ``BBS'' abbreviate in computing?
bulletin board system

What does ``BCC'' abbreviate in medicine?
basal cell carcinoma

What does ``bcc'' abbreviate?
blind carbon copy

What does ``BD'' abbreviate in education?
Bachelor of Divinity

What does ``BEF'' abbreviate?
British Expeditionary Force

What does ``BER'' abbreviate?
bit error rate

What does ``bhp'' abbreviate?
brake horsepower: the available power of an engine, assessed by measuring the force needed to brake it

What does ``blithe'' mean?
happy or joyous

What does ``BMR'' abbreviate?
basal metabolic rate

What does ``BOD'' abbreviate?
biochemical oxygen demand

What does ``BOD'' abbreviate?
biochemical oxygen demand: the amount of dissolved oxygen that must be present in water for microorganisms to decompose the organic matter in the water, used as a measure of the degree of pollution

What does ``et al.'' stand for?
et alii `and others'

What does ``ex lib.'' stand for?
ex libris `from the library of'

What does me ``transmitte sursum, Caledoni!'' mean?
beam me up, Scotty!

What does ``mutatis mutandis'' mean?
changing what needs changing

What does ``q.v.'' abbreviate?
quod vide `which see'

What does ``quid quid latine dictum sit, altum videtur'' mean?
anything said in Latin sounds profound

What does the Feit--Thompson theorem say?
any finite, non-abelian, simple group has even order

What does the Greek root dactyl-- mean?
finger, toe, digit; from δάκτυλος (daktulos)

What does the Greek root dem-- mean?
people; from δῆμος (dēmos)

What does the Greek root dendr-- mean?
resembling a tree; from δένδρον (dendron), akin to δρύς (drys) `tree'

What does the Greek root derm-- mean?
skin; from δέρμα (derma)

What does the Greek root deuter-- mean?
second; from δεύτερος (deuteros)

What does the Greek root dexi-- mean?
right; from δεξιό `right'

What does the Greek root di-- mean?
two

What does the Greek root dia-- mean?
apart, through; from διά (dia)

What does the Greek root dino-- mean?
terrible, fearfully great; from δεινός (deinos)

What does the Greek root dipl-- mean?
double, twofold; from διπλός (diplos)

What does the Greek root dodec-- mean?
twelve; from δώδεκα (dodeka)

What does the Greek root dy-- mean?
two; from δυο (duo)

What does the Greek root dynam-- mean?
power; from δύναμη (dunamē)

What does the Greek root dys-- mean?
badly, ill; from δυσ-

What does the Greek root ec-- mean?
out; from ἐκ (ek)

What does the Greek root eco-- mean?
house; from οἶκος (oikos)

What does the Greek root ecto-- mean?
outside; from ἐκτός (ektos)

What does the Greek root eme-- mean?
vomit; from ἔμετος (emetos)

What does the Greek root endo-- mean?
inside; from ἔνδον (endon)

What does the Greek root engy-- mean?
narrow; from ἐγγύς (engys)

What does the Greek root ennea-- mean?
nine; from ἐννέα (ennea)

What does the Greek root epistem-- mean?
knowledge or science; from ἐπιστήμη (epistēmē)

What does the Greek root erg-- mean?
work; from έργον (ergon)

What does the Greek root erythr-- mean?
red; ἐρυθρός (eruthros); erythrocyte

What does the Greek root eso-- mean?
within; ἔσω (esō); esoteric

What does the Greek root ethm-- mean?
sieve; ἠθμός (ethmos); ἤθειν (ethein); ethmoid

What does the Greek root ethn-- mean?
people, race, tribe, nation; ἔθνος (ethnos); ethnarch, ethnic

What does the Greek root etym-- mean?
true; ἔτυμος (etumos); etymology

What does the Greek root eu-- mean?
well, good; εὖ (eu); euphoria, euthanasia

What does the Greek root eur-- mean?
wide; εὐρύς (eurus); Europe

What does the Greek root exo-- mean?
outside; ἔξω (eksō); exoskeleton, exothermic

What does the Greek root fant-- mean?
to show; φαντάζω; fantasy

What does the Greek root galact-- mean?
milk; γάλα, γαλακτός (gala, galaktos); galactic

What does the Greek root gastr-- mean?
stomach; γαστήρ (gaster); gastric, gastroenterology

What does the Greek root gen-- mean?
race, kind,birth; γένος (genos); eugenics, genocide

What does the Greek root geo-- mean?
earth; γῆ (gē), γεω- (geō-); geography, geology, geometry

What does the Greek root glia-- mean?
glue; γλία (glia); glial

What does the Greek root gram-- mean?
writing; γράμμα (gramma); grammar, grammatic

What does the Greek root graph-- mean?
draw, write; γραφή (graphē); grapheme, graphic, graphology

What does the Greek root gymn-- mean?
nude; γυμνός (gymnos); gymnasium, gymnastics, gymnosperm

What does the Greek root gyn-- mean?
woman; γυνή; gynecology

What does the Greek root hal-- mean?
salt; ἅλς, ἁλός (hals, halos); halogen

What does the Greek root hapl-- mean?
simple, single; ἁπλοῦς (haplous); haploid, haplotype

What does the Greek root heli-- mean?
sun; ἥλιος (hēlios); heliocentric, heliotrope, helium

What does the Greek root hemi-- mean?
half; ἥμισυς (hēmisus); hemicycle, hemisphere

What does the Greek root hen-- mean?
one; ἕν (hen); henad, hyphen

What does the Greek root hendec-- mean?
eleven; ἕνδεκα (hendeka); hendecagon

What does the Greek root hept-- mean?
seven; ἑπτά (hepta); heptagon, heptathlon, heptode

What does the Greek root herp-- mean?
creep; ἕρπω, ἕρπειν (herpō, herpein); herpes, herpetology

What does the Greek root heter-- mean?
different, other; ἕτερος (heteros); heterodoxy

What does the Greek root heur-- mean?
find; εὑρίσκω (heuriskō); heuristic

What does the Greek root hex-- mean?
six; ἕξ (hex); hexagon, hexahedron, hexode

What does the Greek root hipp-- mean?
horse; ἵππος (hippos); hippodrome

What does the Greek root hod-- mean?
way; ὁδός (hodos); cathode, herpolhode, hodometer

What does the Greek root hol-- mean?
whole; ὅλος (holos); holistic

What does the Greek root hom-- mean?
same; ὁμός (homos); homophone, homosexual

What does the Greek root homal-- mean?
even, flat; ὁμαλός (homalos); anomalous

What does the Greek root home-- mean?
like; ὅμοιος (homoios); homeostasis

What does the Greek root hor-- mean?
boundary; ὅρος (horos); aphorism, horizon

What does the Greek root hor-- mean?
hour; ὥρα (hōra); horoscope

What does the Greek root horm-- mean?
that which excites; ὁρμή (hormē); hormone

What does the Greek root hyal-- mean?
glass; ὕαλος (hualos); hyaline, hyaloid

What does the Greek root hydr-- mean?
water; ὕδωρ (hudōr); hydraulics, hydrology, hydrolysis, hydrophily, hydrophobia, hydroponic, hydrous

What does the Greek root hygr-- mean?
wet; ὑγρός (hugros); hygrometer

What does the Greek root hyo-- mean?
U-shaped; ὑοειδής (huoeidēs); hyoid

What does the Greek root hyp-- mean?
under; ὑπό (hupo); hypothermia

What does the Greek root hyper-- mean?
above, over; ὑπέρ (huper); hyperbole, hypertonic

What does the Greek root hypn-- mean?
sleep; ὕπνος (hupnos); hypnosis

What does the Greek root hyster-- mean?
later; ὕστερος (husteros); hysteresis

What does the Latin and Greek root ego-- mean?
self, I (first person); from ego, ἐγώ

What does the Latin ``apis'' mean?
bee

What does the Latin ``arena'' mean?
sand

What does ``NB'' abbreviate?
Nota Bene `note well'

What does the Latin root de-- mean?
from, away from, removing, down; from dē

What does the Latin root deb-- mean?
owe; from debere, debitus

What does the Latin root decim-- mean?
tenth part; from decimus `tenth' from decem `ten'

What does the Latin root den-- mean?
ten each; from deni

What does the Latin root dens-- mean?
thick; from densus

What does the Latin root dent-- mean?
tooth; from dens, dentis

What does the Latin root dexter-- mean?
right; from dexter

What does the Latin root dict-- mean?
say, speak; from dicere, dictus

What does the Latin root digit-- mean?
finger; from digitus

What does the Latin root dom-- mean?
house; from domus

What does the Latin root don-- mean?
give; from donare

What does the Latin root dorm-- mean?
sleep; from dormire

What does the Latin root dors-- mean?
back; from dorsum

What does the Latin root du-- mean?
two; from duo

What does the Latin root dub-- mean?
doubtful; from dubius

What does the Latin root dulc-- mean?
sweet; from dulcis

What does the Latin root dur-- mean?
hard; from durus

What does the Latin root emul-- mean?
striving to equal, rivalling; from aemulus, aemulare

What does the Latin root ens-- mean?
sword; from ensis

What does the Latin root equ-- mean?
horse; from equus

What does the Latin root err-- mean?
stray; errare; aberration, errant

What does the Latin root extrem-- mean?
outermost, utmost; extremus; extremity, extremophile

What does the Latin root fab-- mean?
bean; faba; faba bean

What does the Latin root falc-- mean?
sickle; falx, falcis; falciform

What does the Latin root fallac-- mean?
false; fallax, fallacis; fallacy

What does the Latin root famili-- mean?
close attendant; famulus; familiarity

What does the Latin root fasc-- mean?
bundle; fascis; fasciculation, fascism

What does the Latin root fatu-- mean?
foolish, useless; fatuus; fatuous, infatuation

What does the Latin root feder-- mean?
treaty, agreement, contract, league, pact; foedus, foederis; confederation, federal

What does the Latin root fel-- mean?
cat; feles, felis; Felinae, feline

What does the Latin root felic-- mean?
happy, merry; felix, felicis; felicity

What does the Latin root fell-- mean?
suck; fellare; fellation

What does the Latin root femin-- mean?
women, female; femina; femininity

What does the Latin root femor-- mean?
thigh; femur, femoris; femoral

What does the Latin root fenestr-- mean?
window; fenestra; defenestration

What does the Latin root fer-- mean?
carry; ferre; reference, transfer

What does the Latin root feroc-- mean?
fierce; ferox, ferocis; ferocity

What does the Latin root ferr-- mean?
iron; ferrum; ferrous

What does the Latin root fet-- mean?
stink; fetere; fetid, fetor

What does the Latin root fic-- mean?
fig; ficus; Ficus

What does the Latin root fil-- mean?
thread; filum; filament

What does the Latin root fili-- mean?
son; filius; affiliation

What does the Latin root fin-- mean?
end; finis; finish, final

What does the Latin root firm-- mean?
fix, settle; firmus, firmare; confirmation, firmament

What does the Latin root fistul-- mean?
hollow, tube; fistula

What does the Latin root fl-- mean?
blow; flare, flatus; flatulence, inflation, insufflation

What does the Latin root flacc-- mean?
flabby; flaccus, flaccere; flaccid

What does the Latin root flav-- mean?
yellow; flavus; flavonoid

What does the Latin root flor-- mean?
flower; flos, floris; floral, florid

What does the Latin root foc-- mean?
hearth; focus; focal

What does the Latin root foen-- mean?
hay; fenuculum

What does the Latin root foli-- mean?
leaf; folium; defoliant

What does the Latin root font-- mean?
spring; fons, fontis; font, fontal, fontanelle

What does the Latin root for-- mean?
bore, drill; forare, foratus; foralite, foramen, foraminifer, perforation

What does the Latin root form-- mean?
shape; forma; conformity, deformity, formation, reformatory

What does the Latin root fornic-- mean?
vault; fornix, fornicis; fornication

What does the Latin root fort-- mean?
strong; fortis; fortification

What does the Latin root fove-- mean?
shallow round depression; fovea; fovea

What does the Latin root frig-- mean?
cold; frigere; frigid, frigorific

What does the Latin root front-- mean?
forehead; frons, frontis; confront, frontage, frontal

What does the Latin root fum-- mean?
smoke; fumus; fume, fumigation

What does the Latin root fund-- mean?
bottom; fundus, fundare; fundamentalism, profundity

What does the Latin root furc-- mean?
fork; furca; bifurcation

What does the Latin root fusc-- mean?
dark; fuscus; obfuscation

What does the Latin root gel-- mean?
icy cold; gelum; gelatin, gelid

What does the Latin root germin-- mean?
sprout; germen, germinis; germination

What does the Latin root glabr-- mean?
hairless; glaber; glabrous

What does the Latin root glaci-- mean?
ice; glacies; glacier

What does the Latin root gladi-- mean?
sword; gladius; gladiator

What does the Latin root glob-- mean?
sphere; globus; global, globule

What does the Latin root glori-- mean?
glory; gloria; glorify

What does the Latin root glutin-- mean?
glue; gluten, glutinis; agglutination

What does the Latin root gran-- mean?
grain; granum; granary, granite, granola, granule

What does the Latin root grand-- mean?
grand; grandis; grandiloquous, grandiosity

What does the Latin root grat-- mean?
thank, please; gratus; gratitude, ingrate

What does the Latin root grav-- mean?
heavy; gravis; aggravation, grave, gravity

What does the Latin root greg-- mean?
flock; grex, gregis; egregious, gregarious, segregation

What does the Latin root gubern-- mean?
govern, pilot; gubernare; gubernatorial

What does the Latin root gust-- mean?
taste; gustus; disgust, gusto

What does the Latin root gutt-- mean?
drop; gutta; gutta, guttifer, guttiform

What does the Latin root guttur-- mean?
throat; guttur; guttural

What does the Latin root herb-- mean?
grass; herba; herbal, herbicide

What does the Latin root hered-- mean?
heir; heres, heredis; heredity

What does the Latin root hibern-- mean?
wintry; hibernus; hibernation

What does the Latin root hiem-- mean?
winter; hiems; hiemal

What does the Latin root hirsut-- mean?
hairy; hirtus, hirsutus; hirsute

What does the Latin root hispid-- mean?
bristly; hispidus; hispidity, hispidulous

What does the Latin root histri-- mean?
actor; histrio, histrionis; histrionic

What does the Latin root homin-- mean?
human; homo, hominis; hominid

What does the Latin root honor-- mean?
esteem; honos, honoris; honorable, honorarium

What does the Latin root hort-- mean?
garden; hortus, horti; horticulture

What does the Latin root hospit-- mean?
host; hospes, hospitis; hospital, hospitality, inhospitable

What does the Latin root host-- mean?
enemy; hostis; hostile

What does the Latin root hum-- mean?
ground; humus, humare; exhumation, inhume

What does the Spanish ``arroz'' mean?
rice

What does ``v.s.'' abbreviate?
vide supra `see above'

What drink consists of iced tea and lemonade?
Arnold Palmer

What dry pulpy residue is left after the extraction of juice from sugar cane, used as fuel for electricity generators, etc.?
bagasse

What Dutch-derived verb can mean ``cause problems or difficulties for'' or ``lay siege to''?
beleaguer

What early form of colour photography using plates coated with dyed starch grains was patented by the Lumière brothers in 1904?
autochrome

What early type of portable gun was supported on a tripod or forked rest?
arquebus

What eastern Brazilian port is the capital of Sergipe and where indigenous people spoke the now-extinct Boime language on the São Francisco River?
Aracajú

What eastern Indonesian sea lies between the central and south Molucca Islands?
Banda Sea

What economic forum established in 1989 consists of the US, China, Japan, Australia, Indonesia, and Thailand?
APEC (Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation)

What edible Mediterranean plant of the cabbage family (Eruca vesicaria subsp. sativa) is eaten in salads?
arugula

What edible rockfish is of commercial importance in California?
bocaccio

What test is used to determine whether a fictional work portrays women in a sexist way or a way characterized by gender stereotyping?
Bechdel test

What encyclical of Clement IV written in 1265 stated that appointments to all benefices were a papal prerogative?
Licet Ecclesiarum

What English actress and singer is best known for her lead roles in Mary Poppins and The sound of music?
Julie Andrews

What English botanist accompanied Captain James Cook on his first voyage to the Pacific?
Sir Joseph Banks

What English composer and Baron of Sydmonton wrote many successful musicals (some with Sir Tim Rice) like Jesus Christ superstar, Cats, and The phantom of the opera?
Andrew Lloyd Webber

What English composer is best known for the fourteen light operas he wrote with librettist W. S. Gilbert?
Sir Arthur Sullivan

What English humanist scholar and writer was noted for his treatise on archery, Toxophilus (1545), and The scholemaster (1570), an influential and practical tract on education?
Roger Ascham

What English painter is best known for the cover design for the Beatles album Sergeant Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band (1967)?
Sir Peter Blake

What English physicist and 1948 Nobel Prize winner was a member of the Maud Committee, which dealt with the atom bomb development and modified the cloud chamber for the study of cosmic rays?
Patrick Blackett

What English pirate was initially a privateer during the War of the Spanish Succession but turned to piracy and concentrated on the West Indies and the Virginia--North Carolina coast of America after 1714?
Blackbeard (Edward Teach)

What English statesman and philosopher wrote The advancement of learning (1605) and Novum Organum (1620)?
Francis Bacon

What English-based pidgin language, also called ``Beach-la-mar,'' is used as a lingua franca in Fiji and the Solomon Islands and as an official language in Vanuatu?
Bislama

What English-born American actress appeared in movies like Gaslight and The Manchurian candidate and starred in Murder, she wrote (1984--96) and Broadway shows Mame (1966), Gypsy (1974), and Sweeney Todd (1979)?
Angela Lansbury

What enzyme found in saliva and pancreatic fluid converts starch and glycogen into simple sugars?
amylase

What error number is indicates that an internet address cannot be found?
404

What Ethiopian princess (the eponym of the nearest galaxy to the Milky Way) whose mother, Cassiopeia, boasted that she was more beautiful than the Nereids was fastened to a rock and exposed to the monster (to placate Poseidon) but was rescued by Perseus?
Andromeda

What European songbird, especially a warbler, is eaten as a delicacy?
beccafico

What exclamation in baccarat, chemin de fer, and similar games is used to express a player's willingness to meet the banker's whole stake single-handed?
banco

What extreme left-wing terrorist organization that operated in former West Germany between 1970 and 1998 and was also called ``the Red Army Faction''?
Baader--Meinhhof Group

What eye defect is caused by a deviation from spherical curvature, resulting in distorted images as light rays are prevented from meeting at a common focus?
astigmatism

What faint southern constellation close to the south celestial pole represents a bird-of-paradise?
Apus

What fifteenth ecumenical council of the Catholic Church (1311--12) convoked by Clement V defined the human soul as essentially and solely the form of the human body and withdrew papal support for the Knights Templar?
Council of Vienne

What fig tree is regarded as sacred by Buddhists?
bo/bodhi tree

What figure of Egyptian mythology is the sun or solar disk, the deity of a monotheistic cult, particularly during Akhenaten's reign?
Aten

What figure of Greek mythology slew the monster Chimera with the help of the winged horse Pegasus?
Bellerophon

What figure whose name comes from the Hebrew ``lord'' was a god of fertility associated with Hadad and mentioned many times in the Bible?
Baal

What Filipino phrase expresses an attitude of optimistic acceptance or fatalistic resignation in an uncertain or difficult situation?
bahala na

What fine woollen cloth sometimes mixed with silk or cotton with a hopsack twill weave giving a surface that is lightly pebbled or ribbed is used chiefly for coats and suits?
barathea

What finest stone masonry unit mentioned by Vitruvius as ``opus isodomum'' is made of large square-cut stones, typically used as a facing on brick or stone walls?
ashlar

What forest east of Paris, France, and just east of Château-Thierry, was the scene of an American victory over the Germans in June 1918 during World War I?
Belleau Wood

What forest-dwelling wild pig with several upturned hornlike tusks is native to Malaysia?
babirusa

What forested upland region extending over parts of south-east Belgium, north-east France, and Luxembourg was the scene of fierce fighting in both world wars?
Ardennes

What form of aircraft has freely rotating horizontal vanes and a propeller but differs from a helicopter in that the vanes are not powered but rotate in the slipstream, propulsion being by a conventional mounted engine?
autogiro

What form of punishment or torture involves caning the soles of someone's feet?
bastinado

What form of theology attempts to approach God by negation?
apophatic theology

What formal adjective describes someone excessively fond of drinking alcohol?
bibulous

What formal adjective from the Greek for ``of or for artisans'' is defined as ``not operating on a refined or elevated level'' or ``relating to technical work''?
banausic

What formal word for ``donation or gift'' comes from the Latin for ``do good to''?
benefaction

What former artists' colony in southeastern Arizona was a copper mining center in the early 1900s and noted as the source of a type of turquoise, an incidental byproduct of copper mining?
Bisbee

What former name for Rhode Island is also the name of the largest island in Narragansett Bay?
Aquidneck

What former professor of poetry at Oxford is known for poems such as ``The scholar-gipsy'' and ``Dover beach''?
Matthew Arnold

What former province of western France (capital Angers) was an English possession from 1154 until 1204 and is the namesake of an egg-shaped variety of pear?
Anjou

What formula relates the baryon number $B$, the strangeness $S$, and the isospin $I_3$ of quarks and hadrons to the electric charge $Q$?
Gell-Mann--Nishijima formula

What fossil bipedal primate with both ape-like and human characteristics was found in Pliocene and Lower Pleistocene deposits (circa 4 million to 1 million years old) in Africa?
Australopithecus

What four allegorical mounted figures will herald the end of the world as described in Revelation?
four horsemen of the apocalypse: Pestilence (or Conquest), War, Famine, Death

What four-wheeled horse-drawn carriage had a collapsible hood over the rear half, a seat in front for the driver, and seats facing each other for the passengers and was used primarily in the nineteenth century?
barouche

What fragrant resin is produced by several trees related to myrrh and is used in perfumes?
bdellium

What French beastly term is used for a person or thing that one particularly dislikes?
bête noire

(feast day: 28 May) What French monk after whom a dog breed is named founded two hospices for travellers in the Alps?
St. Bernard

What French name is given to a female Hindu dancer, especially one at a southern Indian temple?
bayadère

What French name was given to the period of settled and comfortable life preceding World War I?
belle époque

What French noun is used for the apparatus or set of utensils for serving or preparing a meal?
batterie de cuisine

What French noun means a young foreign person, typically a woman, who helps with housework or child care in exchange for room and board?
au pair

What French painter and exponent of the French Academic style painted the famed Le Pape Formose et Étienne VII, depicting the Cadaver Synod?
Jean-Paul Laurens

What French unit of land area was equivalent to 3,420 square meters?
arpent

What French-derived adjective means ``right-thinking'' or ``orthodox''?
bien pensant

What French-derived term means ``lullaby''?
berceuse

What French-derived word (from the French for ``joke'') refers to a person who talks nonsense?
blagueur

What fruity adjective describes a person with round, rosy cheeks?
apple-cheeked

What full-bodied red Italian wine comes from a region in Piedmont of the same name?
Barolo

What game similar to field or ice hockey is played with a ball and large curved sticks on ice?
bandy

What geological term is used for a very large igneous intrusion extending deep in the earth's crust?
batholith

What German engineer built the first vehicle to be powered by an internal combustion engine?
Karl Benz

What German founder of structural organic chemistry is best known for discovering the ring structure of benzene?
Friedrich August Kekulé

What German group of expressionist painters based in Munich and including Kandinsky, Arp, and Klee is named after a painting by Kandinsky?
Blaue Reiter

What German manufacturer of pianos was founded in 1856 by Wilhelm Carl?
Bechstein

What German philosopher supposed that the will is identified with ultimate reality and happiness is only achieved by abnegating the will (as desire), as expressed in The world as will and idea (1818)?
Arthur Schopenhauer

What German-derived British phrase means ``stoicism and determination in a difficult or dangerous situation, especially as displayed by a group of people''?
Blitz spirit

What German-derived name is given to a novel dealing with one person's formative years or spiritual education?
Bildungsroman

What glazed coloured tile whose name comes from the Spanish for ``blue'' is used in Spanish and Portuguese buildings traditionally? 
azulejo

What goddess of Egyptian mythology is usually shown as a woman with the head of a cat, wearing one gold earring?
Bastet

What gold coin of ancient Rome was worth twenty-five silver denarii?
aureus

What golden adjective describes language that is highly ornamented or elaborate?
aureate

What grandson of Sennacherib and king of Assyria was a patron of the arts who established a library of more than 20,000 clay tablets at Nineveh?
Ashurbanipal

What Greek astronomer of Samos founded an important school of Hellenic astronomy and was aware of the rotation of the earth around the sun, thus being able to account for the seasons?
Aristarchus

What Greek comic playwright is noted for Lysistrata, The birds, The frogs, and The clouds?
Aristophanes

What Greek goddess of beauty, fertility, and sexual love equivalent to Venus is described as either the daughter of Zeus and Dione or being born from the sea?
Aphrodite

What Greek lyric poet is best known for his celebrations of love and wine?
Anacreon

What Greek mathematician associated with Perga examined and redefined the various conic sections and was the first to use the words ellipse, parabola, and hyperbola to describe them?
Apollonius

What Greek philosopher of Cyrene is considered the founder of the Cyrenaic school?
Aristippus the Elder

What Greek philosopher who taught in Athens believed that all matter was infinitely divisible and motionless until animated by the mind (nous)?
Anaxagoras

What Greek poet and grammarian associated with Rhodes wrote Argonautica: an epic poem in Homeric style?
Apollonius

What Greek poet is credited with the invention of iambic meter?
Archilochus

What Greek scholar of Samothrace is noted for his editions of the writings of Homer and other Greek authors?
Aristarchus

What Greek scientist who lived in Miletus believed that earth was cylindrical and poised in space and taught that life began in water and humans originated from fish?
Anaximander

(feast day: 2 May) What Greek theologian and upholder of Christian orthodoxy against the Arian heresy is associated with Alexandria?
St. Athanasius

What Greek writer wrote Anabasis: a narration of Cyrus the Younger's advance into Asia?
Xenophon

What green and oxidized derivative of bilirubin is excreted in bile?
biliverdin

What Gregory IX bull announced the Liber extra in 1234?
Rex pacificus

What grotesque god of Egyptian mythology, depicted with short legs, an obese body, and an almost bestial face, dispelled evil spirits?
Bes

What group of four large and seven small islands in the Mediterranean off Spain's eastern coast form an autonomous region there with its capital in Palma on Majorca?
Balearic Islands

What group of heroes accompanied Jason aboard a ship of a similar name in the quest for the Golden Fleece?
Argonauts

What group of islands are the Philippines' northernmost?
Batan Islands

What group of Niger-Congo languages spoken in central and southern Africa includes Swahili, Xhosa, and Zulu?
Bantu

What group of three islands is located off the west coast of Ireland and the namesake of a type of traditional knitwear?
Aran Islands

What group of twenty-four volcanic islands lies to the north of Luzon?
Babuyan Islands

What guitar technique involves laying one finger across all the strings at a particular fret?
barré

What Gujarati industrial port on the Gulf of Cambay was the capital of a former Rajput princely state of the same name?
Bhavnagar

What Haitian president led a movement against the dictatorship of Duvalier in the 1980s?
Jean-Bertrand Aristide

What Haitian statesman known as Baby Doc succeeded to his father's presidency in 1971 but was overthrown by a mass uprising in 1986?
Jean-Claude Duvalier

What headland on the Arctic coast, also called ``Nuvuk,'' is the northernmost point in the US?
Point Barrow

What Hebrew patriarch, son of Jacob and Zilpah, was the progenitor of a tribe of Israel?
Asher

What heel-less slipper, typically in oriental style, has a name that comes from the Persian for ``foot covering''?
babouche

What Hellenistic dynasty centred on the city of Pergamum in Asia Minor flourished in the third and second centuries BC and was a rump state left after the collapse of the Lysimachian Empire?
Attalid dynasty

What hero and god of healing was the son of Apollo?
Asclepius

What hero is said to have lived from 1720 to 1797 and served in the Russian army against the Turks? Rudolph Erich Raspe told extravagant tales of his prowess in a book of fantastic travellers' tales (1785).
Baron Munchausen

What hero prince in the Mahabharata is one of the two main characters in the Bhagavadgita?
Arjuna

What historic area at the southern end of Manhattan contains attractions such as an old fort named Castle Clinton?
Battery

What historic commercial street in downtown Memphis, Tennessee, is associated with black music and commerce?
Beale Street

What historic neighbourhood in downtown Boston, Massachusetts, is on high ground north of the Boston Common?
Beacon Hill

What historic residential and commercial district in western Boston is located on land along the Charles River that was reclaimed in the nineteenth century?
Back Bay

What historic site in central Virginia, at the head of a river with the same name, marks where Robert E. Lee surrendered his Confederate forces in April 1865, ending the Civil War?
Appomattox

What historic site in east-central Colorado, north-east of La Junta, is located on the Arkansas River and the former Santa Fe Trail?
Bent's Fort

What hookworm infection of the small intestine often leads to anemia?
ancylostomiasis (typically from Ancylostoma duodenale)

What Hungarian-born British novelist wrote The scarlet pimpernel (1905)?
Baroness Emmusca Orczy

What hydrodynamic principle states that an increase in the velocity of a stream of fluid results in a decrease in pressure?
Bernoulli's principle

What hydrophilic amino acid with the chemical formula CONH2CH2CH(NH2)COOH is a constituent of most proteins and encoded by the codons AAU and AAC?
asparagine

What immortal flower is said to grow in the Elysian fields?
asphodel

What important source of medieval Canon Law, also called ``Decretales Gregorii IX,'' was formed by Gregory IX and his chaplain and confessor, St. Raymond of Penyafort, to emphasize his power over the Universal Church?
Liber extra

What index catalogues works of folklore?
Aarne--Thompson--Uther index

What is ``v''?
letter

What Indian city in Karnataka state is home to Rani Chennamma of Kittur and Suvarna Vidhana Soudha?
Belgaum

What Indian fig tree whose branches produce aerial roots that later become accessory trunks covers several acres in this manner?
banyan

What Indonesian city was founded by the Dutch in 1810 and was the capital of the former Dutch East Indies?
Bandung

What rapidly growing Indonesian city was the largest city of the former Dutch East Indies?
Surabaya

What Indonesian island in the Java Sea lies between Borneo and Sumatra and is known for its pepper and tin?
Belitung

What Indonesian island in the Java Sea, between Borneo and Sumatra, is known for its pepper and tin?
Belitung

What industrial city in east-central Maine on the Penobscot River was once a lumbering centre?
Bangor

What industrial city in south-central California is an oil industry centre in the San Joaquin Valley?
Bakersfield

What industrial city in Uttar Pradesh, also called ``Nath Nagri,'' is the birthplace of Draupadi according to the Mahabharata and the location of the remains of Ahichchhatra?
Bareilly

What industrial seaport on the Adriatic is the capital of Apulia?
Bari

What instrument is used to measure the depth of water in oceans, seas, or lakes?
bathymeter

What instrument records the body movements caused by blood ejection from the heart at each beat?
ballistocardiograph

What Iranian city is considered holy in Shia Islam and home to the shrine of Fatimah bint Musa?
Qom

What Iraqi city on the River Euphrates contains the shrine of Ali and is a holy city for Shiites?
Najaf

What Iraqi oil port on the Shatt al-Arab bears the title ``Venice of the East''?
Basra

What is a billet-doux?
love letter

What is a group of three asterisks called?
asterism

What is a native or inhabitant of the Bahamas called?
Bahamian

What is a person who legally transfers a right or liability to someone else called?
assignor

What is a poem or piece of music appropriate to the dawn or early morning, its name deriving from the Spanish for ``dawn''?
aubade

What is a pseudoscalar quantity?
behaves like a scalar but changes sign under a parity inversion

What is amylopectin?
the non-crystallizable form of starch, consisting of branched polysaccharide chains

What is amylose?
the crystallizable form of starch, consisting of long unbranched polysaccharide chains

What is amyotrophy?
muscular atrophy

What is an ambry?
small recess or cupboard in the wall of a church

What is an ampulla?
roughly spherical Roman flask with two handles, a flask for sacred uses such as holding the oil for anointing the sovereign at a coronation; a cavity, or the dilated end of a vessel, shaped like a Roman ampulla

What is an amuse-gueule/amuse-bouche?
small savoury item of food served as an appetizer before a meal

What is an anabasis?
military advance into the interior of a country

What is an anacoluthon?
sentence or construction in which the expected grammatical sequence is absent

What is an anacrusis?
one or more unstressed syllables at the beginning of a verse; upbeat

What is an anagnorisis?
the point in a play, novel, etc. in which a principal character recognizes or discovers another character's true identity or the true nature of their own circumstances

What is an analgesic?
pain reliever

What is an anamnesis?
recollection, especially of a supposed previous existence

What is an anapest?
metrical foot consisting of two short or unstressed syllables followed by one long or stressed syllable

What is an ancien régime?
political or social system that has been displaced by another (from the political/social system in France before the Revolution of 1789)

What is an ancon?
(architecture) console, typically consisting of two volutes, that supports or appears to support a cornice; each of a pair of projections on either side of a block of stone or other material, used for lifting it

What is an andiron?
metal stand, typically one of a pair, for supporting wood burning in a fireplace

What is an andisol?
black or dark brown soil formed from volcanic material, with an A horizon rich in organic material

What is an androgen?
male sex hormone such as testosterone

What is an anemometer?
instrument for measuring the speed of the wind or of any current of gas

What is an aneurysm?
excessive localized enlargement of an artery caused by a weakening of the artery wall

What is an anthology?
published collection of poems or other pieces of writing

What is an aperçu?
comment or brief reference that makes an illuminating or entertaining point

What is an aperitif?
alcoholic drink taken before a meal to stimulate the appetite

What is an apheresis in linguistics?
the loss of a sound or sounds at the beginning of a word, e.g. in the derivation of ``adder'' from ``nadder''

What is an aphorism?
pithy observation that contains a general truth

What is an aphrodisiac?
food, drink, or drug that stimulates sexual desire

What is an aphtha?
small ulcer occurring in groups in the mouth or on the tongue

What is an apologue?
moral fable, especially one with animals as characters

What is an apophysis?
natural protuberance from a bone, or inside the shell or exoskeleton of a sea urchin or insect, for the attachment of muscles, often between vertebrae or a rib and a vertebra; a swelling at the base of the sporangium in some mosses

What is an aporia?
irresolvable internal contradiction or logical disjunction in a text, argument, or theory

What is an apostille?
legal certification that makes a document from one country valid in another

What is an apothegm?
concise saying or maxim

What is an apotheosis?
the highest point in the development of something; culmination or climax

What is an Appaloosa?
horse of a North American breed having dark spots on a light background

What is an appellation?
name or title; appellation contrôlée

What is an appetency?
longing or desire

What is an apple polisher?
person who behaves obsequiously to someone important

What is an apsis?
either of two points on the orbit of a planet or satellite that are nearest to or furthest from the body around which it moves

What is an apterous insect?
one with no wings

What is an arbiter?
person who settles a dispute or has ultimate authority in a matter

What is an arête?
sharp mountain ridge

What is an argosy?
large merchant ship, originally one from Ragusa (Dubrovnik) or Venice

What is an arhat?
someone who has attained the goal of the religious life

What is an Armalite?
light automatic rifle

What is an armature?
the rotating coil or coils of a dynamo or electric motor; a framework or formal structure, especially of a literary work

What is an arrière-pensée?
ulterior motive

What is an arris?
sharp edge formed by the meeting of two flat or curved surfaces

What is an artiste?
professional entertainer, primarily a singer or dancer

What is an ascidian?
sea squirt

What is an atelier?
workshop or studio, especially one used by an artist or designer

What is an auberge?
inn in France or another French-speaking country

What is an autodidact?
self-taught person

What is anabiosis?
temporary state of suspended animation or greatly reduced metabolism

What is anabolism?
the synthesis of complex molecules in living organisms from simpler ones together with the storage of energy; constructive metabolism

What is anagen?
the growing phase of a hair follicle

What is analgesia?
inability to feel pain

What is ananda?
extreme happiness, one of the highest states of being

What is anaphora?
the use of a word referring back to a word used earlier in a text or conversation, to avoid repetition, like with pronouns

What is anaphylactic shock?
extreme, often life-threatening allergic reaction to an antigen to which the body has become hypersensitive

What is anaphylaxis?
acute allergic reaction to an antigen to which the body has become hypersensitive

What is anaplasia?
the loss of the mature or specialized features of a cell or tissue, as in malignant tumours

What is ancient demesne?
land recorded in Domesday Book as belonging to the Crown

What is andouille?
type of pork sausage, served typically as an hors d'oeuvre

What is anemia?
deficiency of erythrocytes or hemoglobin in the blood, resulting in pallor and weariness

What is Angelman syndrome?
congenital disorder characterized by mental disability and a tendency toward jerky movements, caused by the absence of certain genes normally present on the copy of chromosome 15 inherited from the mother

What is angiogenesis?
the development of new blood vessels

What is angioma?
abnormal growth produced by the dilatation or new formation of blood vessels

What is anhedonia?
inability to feel pleasure

What is animadversion?
criticism or censure, a comment or remark (especially a critical one)

What is animatronics?
the technique of making and operating lifelike robots, typically for use in film or other entertainment

What is animism?
the attribution of a soul to plants, inanimate objects, and natural phenomena

What is animus?
Jung's term for the masculine part of a woman's personality; hostility or ill feeling; motivation to do something

What is anisette?
liqueur flavoured with aniseed

What is anisogamy?
sexual reproduction by the fusion of dissimilar gametes

What is ankylosing spondylitis?
form of spinal arthritis, chiefly affecting young males, that eventually causes ankylosis of vertebral and sacro-iliac joints

What is ankylosis?
abnormal stiffening and immobility of a joint due to fusion of the bones

What is another name for Amazigh?
Berber

What is another name for barium hydroxide?
baryta

What is another name for the law of cosines?
al-Kashi's theorem

What is another name for the Tubuai Islands?
Austral Islands

What is aphantasia?
the inability to form mental images of objects that are not present

What is aphasia?
loss of ability to understand or express speech, caused by brain damage

What is aphonia?
loss of ability to speak through disease of or damage to the larynx or mouth

What is aplomb?
self-confidence or assurance, especially when in a demanding situation

What is apnea?
temporary cessation of breathing

What is apocope in linguistics?
the loss of a sound or sounds at the end of a word, e.g. in the derivation of curio from curiosity

What is Apollyon?
the Devil (Rev. 9.11)

What is apomixis?
asexual reproduction in plants, in particular agamospermy

What is aposiopesis?
the device of suddenly breaking off in speech

What is apraxia?
inability to perform particular purposive actions, as a result of brain damage

What is après-ski?
the social activities and entertainment following a day's skiing

What is Arcady?
ideal rustic paradise

What is ardour?
enthusiasm or passion

What is argil?
potter's clay

What is argle-bargle?
copious but meaningless talk or writing; nonsense

What is argot?
jargon or slang of a particular group or class

What is Armco?
very pure soft iron, used in particular for roadside guardrails

What is arthralgia?
pain in a joint

What is atmospheric pressure in $\operatorname{Pa}$ at sea level?
$\sim 101,325\ \operatorname{Pa}$

What is automatic writing?
writing said to be produced by a spiritual, occult, or subconscious agency rather than by the conscious intention of the writer

What is avgas?
aircraft fuel

What is bandwidth?
the transmission capacity of a computer network or other telecommunication system; the energy or mental capacity required to deal with a situation

What is bavardage?
idle gossip; chitchat

What is Beelzebub?
the Devil

What is Bengaluru's former name?
Bangalore

What is BHT?
butylated hydroxytoluene

What is Euler's reflection formula?
$$\Gamma(z) \Gamma(1-z) = \frac{\pi}{\sin(\pi z)}$$

Translate ``Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus.''
outside the Church there is no salvation

What is Germany's largest island?
Rügen

What is in an appletini?
vodka with apple juice, apple liqueur, or cider

What is India's largest state?
Rajasthan

What is made in the Bessemer process?
steel

What is Montana's largest city?
Billings

What is the administrative centre of Azad Kashmir?
Muzaffarabad

What is the anatomical name for the armpit?
axilla

What is the apodosis in a sentence?
the main (consequent) clause of a conditional sentence

What is the ASPCA?
American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals

What is the ATF?
Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms

What is the Black Hills' highest point?
Harney Peak

What is the British word for eggplant?
aubergine

What is the capital of Baden-Würtemberg?
Stuttgart

What is the capital of Franche-Comté in north-eastern France?
Besançon

What is the capital of the Azores?
Ponta Delgada

What is the chief port of Corsica?
Bastia

What is the Dutch name for Hague?
's-Gravenhage

What is the English transliteration for the Greek name for Athens?
Athínai

What is the German name for Black Forest?
Schwarzwald

What is the German name for Lake Constance?
Bodensee

What is the highest peak of the Appalachian Mountains?
Mt. Mitchell

What is the highest point of Saudi Arabia?
Jabal Sawda

What is the highest point of the Balkan Mountains?
Botev Peak, Bulgaria

What is the highest point of the Black Mountains?
Mt. Mitchell

What is the Hindi name for India?
Bharat

What is the Irish name for Dublin?
Baile Átha Cliath /bˠlɑˈkliː/

What is the largest city in the Negev?
Beersheba

What is the largest stadium in Brazil?
Maracanã, Rio de Janeiro

What is the largest stadium in China?
Guangdong Olympic Stadium, Guangzhou

What is the largest stadium in Egypt?
Borg El Arab Stadium, Alexandria

What is the largest stadium in India?
Salt Lake Stadium, Kolkata

What is the law term for a person who applies to a higher court for a reversal of a lower court's decision?
appellant

What is the lightest strange meson?
kaon

What is the Liouville function?
$\displaystyle \lambda(n) := \begin{cases} +1& \text{$n$ is a product of an even number of prime numbers}\\ -1 &\text{otherwise}\end{cases}$

What is the longest chapter in the Bible?
Daniel 3

What is the main island of Guadeloupe called?
Basse-Terre

What is the Maori name for New Zealand?
Aotearoa

What is the method and practice of teaching adult learners?
andragogy

What is the more common name for the Eastern Desert?
Arabian Desert

What is the official language of Bhutan?
Dzongkha

What is the official language of Indonesia?
Bahasa Indonesia

What is the official Spanish name for the Galapagos Islands?
Archipiélago de Colón

What is the oldest complete manuscript of the Hebrew Bible in Hebrew?
Leningrad Codex

What is the only language that is official in both Singapore and Sri Lanka?
Tamil

What is the pigeonhole principle?
if there are $n$ items occupying $m$ containers and $n > m$, then at least one container contains more than one item

What is the plural of ``apex''?
apices

What is the plural of ``eyrir'' --- the name of an Icelandic monetary unit?
aurar

What is the point at which a spacecraft is furthest from the moon in lunar orbit?
apolune

What is the prime number theorem?
\begin{align*}\pi(x)\sim \frac{x}{\log x}\end{align*}

What is the proprietary name of lorazepam?
Ativan

What is the proprietary term for quinacrine/mepacrine?
Atabrine

What provincial capital and largest city of Balochistan, Pakistan, famous for its fruit production, lies on the Bolan Pass?
Quetta

What is the psychiatric term for the performance of actions without conscious thought or intention?
automatism

What is the ratio of the span to the mean chord of an airfoil?
aspect ratio

What is the spiritual life principle of the universe in Hinduism, especially when regarded as inherent in the real self?
atman

What is the technical term for a bitter apple?
colocynth

What is the technical term for programmed cell death?
apoptosis

What is another term for the amniotic sac?
bag of waters

What is the traditional Chinese gift of money presented in a red envelope called?
hongbao

What is the underground aqueduct system invented in ancient Persia, the oldest in Gonabad --- dating to 700--500 BC?
qanat

What island country is the most easterly of the Caribbean islands?
Barbados

What island in San Francisco Bay (now a state park) was the western United States coast's chief immigration station?
Angel Island

What island in the western Pacific just south of the equator to the west of the Gilbert Islands has been part of Kiribati since 1979 and is also called Ocean Island?
Banaba

What island is colloquially called ``Apple Isle'' or ``Apple Island''?
Tasmania

What island is separated from mainland Wales by the Menai Strait?
Anglesey

What island of the Baltic Sea in Pomerania is divided between Germany and Poland?
Usedom

What island with its capital in The Valley is the northernmost island of the Leeward Islands?
Anguilla

What Israeli currency is equal to one-hundredth of a shekel?
agora

What Israeli general and Likud statesman was prime minister (2001--06)?
Ariel Sharon

What Italian dish has mixed kinds of meat, such as chicken, veal, and sausage, boiled with vegetables in broth?
bollito misto

What Italian mountain range extends from the northwest to the southern tip of the country?
Apennines

What Italian sculptor created the earliest pair of bronze doors for the Florence baptistery?
Andrea Pisano

What item of legislation (prohibited by the United States Constitution) inflicts the forfeiture of land and civil rights suffered due to a sentence of death for treason or felony without judicial process?
bill of attainder

What Japanese Buddhist festival held annually in August to honour the dead shares its name with the cape of northeastern Tunisia extending into the Mediterranean Sea?
Bon

What Japanese island gets its name from four former provinces: Awa, Tosa, Sanuki, and Iyo?
Shikoku

What Jewish court of law composed of three rabbinic judges is responsible for matters of religious law and the settlement of civil disputes?
Beit Din

What Jewish organization founded in New York in 1843, whose name comes from the Hebrew for ``sons of the covenant,'' pursues educational, humanitarian, and cultural activities and attempts to safeguard the rights and interests of Jewish people around the world?
B'nai B'rith

What Jewish rebel leader known as ``Simeon'' in Jewish sources led the rebellion in 132 against the Romans and was accepted by some of his Jewish contemporaries as the Messiah?
Bar-Cochba

What Jewish term is used for a person's soulmate, especially when considered as an ideal or predestined marriage partner?
bashert

What Kansas Republican was defeated by Bill Clinton in the 1996 presidential election?
Bob Dole

What kind of cell is the star-shaped astrocyte?
glial

What kind of cherry has a large heart shape and is dark blackish-red?
Bing cherry

What kind of firework gives off a blue flame and is used for lighting or signalling?
Bengal light

What kind of French tapestry or carpet, principally from the 18th century, is named after the commune in which it is made?
Aubusson

What kind of grace note is performed before a note of the melody and falls on the beat?
appoggiatura

What kind of Jews (>80\% of Jews today) that descended from central or eastern Europe preserve Palestinian rather than Babylonian Jewish traditions and (in some cases) speak Yiddish?
Ashkenazi

What kind of machine-woven patterned carpet has a cut pile and is named after the town in which it is made?
Axminster

What Korean rice dish is topped with sautéed vegetables, chilli paste, and beef or other meat, sometimes with the addition of a raw or fried egg?
bibimbap

What large constellation is said to represent a man pouring water from a jar?
Aquarius

What large flightless bird related to the emu has a bare head and neck, a tall horny crest, and one or two coloured wattles and is native to the forests of New Guinea?
cassowary

What large inlet of the Yellow Sea is also called the Gulf of Chihli?
Bo Hai

What large northern constellation (the Charioteer) is said to represent a man holding a whip?
Auriga

What large sea cucumber eaten as a delicacy in China and Japan is also called ``trepang''?
bêche-de-mer

What large semicircular/polygonal recess in a church, arched or with a domed roof and typically at the eastern end, usually contains the altar?
apse

What large single-bladed pocketknife has a characteristically long bolster, an elongated oval handle, and one or two blades?
Barlow knife

What large southern constellation is now divided into the constellations Carina, Puppis, and Vela?
Argo Navis

What large vein on the right side at the back of the thorax drains into the superior vena cava?
azygos vein

What large wine bottle has a capacity of twelve litres, equivalent to that of sixteen ordinary wine bottles?
balthazar

What large wine bottle has the capacity of twenty regular bottles?
nebuchadnezzar

What largely arid region of the south-western United States is chiefly located in Nevada, Utah, and California?
Basin and Range Province

What largest city in Maryland is located on Chesapeake Bay?
Baltimore

What largest wild sheep has massive horns and is found in mountainous areas of Asia?
argali (Ovis ammon)

What last king of Babylon and son of Nebuchadnezzar was killed in the sacking of the city, his doom being foretold by writing that appeared on the palace walls at a great banquet?
Belshazzar

What late Neolithic and early Bronze Age European people (c. 2700--1700 BC) were named after distinctive waisted pots that were associated with their burials and appear to have been used for alcoholic drinks?
Beaker folk

What layer of embryonic tissue forms before the development of the embryonic axis?
blastoderm

What legendary king of Greek mythology had vast stables that had never been cleaned until Hercules cleaned them in a day by diverting the Alpheus River to flow through them?
Augeas

What letter of admonishment related to Audi filia et and written by either Urban IV or Clement IV in the 1260s asked a nobleman to cease his adultery?
De sinu patris

What letter was written by Innocent IV to the Mongols on 13 Mar. 1245 appealing to the Mongols to desist from attacking Christians and other nations and inquiring about the Mongols' future intentions after his first letter, Dei patris immensa?
Cum non solum

What letter written by Urban IV to Mongol Ilkhanate leader Hulagu in 1263/64 discussed the arrival of Hulagu's uncredentialed envoy John the Hungarian, cautiously welcoming him, and announced that William II of Agen, Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem, would be investigating further?
Exultavit cor nostrum

What linguistic term refers to a pair of consecutive written units such as letters, syllables, or words?
bigram

What literary device in which a past event is narrated at a point later than its chronological place in a story is also a term used for ascension into heaven?
analepsis

What literary term means a state of serene calmness?
ataraxy

What locality southeast of Richmond, Virginia, founded by Sir Thomas Dale in 1613, was the site of an 1864 Civil War battle?
Bermuda Hundred

What long-acting sedative and sleep-inducing drug is also called ``diethylbarbituric acid'' and has the chemical formula C6H12O3N2?
barbital

What long-noted resort in east-central New Jersey has the nickname ``The Dark City''?
Asbury Park

What lymphocyte not processed by the thymus gland is responsible for producing antibodies and is named after the first letter of the bird organ in which it was first identified?
B cell (B lymphocyte)

What lyrical style of operatic singing from the Italian `fine song' uses a full, rich, broad tone and smooth phrasing?
bel canto

What main beam rests across the tops of columns, specifically the lower third entablature?
architrave

What main research library of Oxford University is one of six copyright libraries in the United Kingdom?
Bodleian Library

What marine crustacean with an external shell attaches itself permanently to various surfaces and feeds by filtering particles from the water using its modified feathery legs?
barnacle

What martial art traditionally practiced in the Philippines is characterized by the use of sticks, bladed weapons, and bare hands in combat?
arnis

What Massachusetts town is the largest community on Cape Cod and the commercial centre for a resort area?
Barnstable

What mathematical law states that, in any large, randomly produced set of natural numbers, around thirty percent will begin with 1, eighteen percent with 2, and so on, with the smallest percentage starting with 9?
Benford's law

What measure of a newborn's physical condition is obtained by adding points (0, 1, or 2) for heart rate, respiratory effort, muscle tone, response to stimulation, and skin coloration?
Apgar score

What medical term is given to abnormal physical weakness or lack of energy?
asthenia

What medical term is used for a connection made surgically between adjacent blood vessels, parts of the intestine, or other channels of the body and more generally is a cross-connection between adjacent channels, tubes, fibres, or other parts of a network?
anastomosis

What medieval bodily humour was believed to be associated with a dispirited temperament?
black bile/melancholy

What medieval helmet of light steel fits close to the wearer's head and typically has a visor?
basinet

What medieval Latin-derived word means ``buzz'' or ``hum''?
bombinate

What Mediterranean plant of the parsley family is cultivated for its aromatic seeds used in cooking and herbal medicine?
anise

What Mediterranean port in northeastern Libya was the joint capital of Libya from 1951 to 1972?
Benghazi

What medium blue pigment is made from basic copper carbonate?
bice

What member of a nomadic Pygmy people inhabits the rainforests of south-eastern Cameroon and northern Gabon?
Baka

What member of Bantu-speaking people forms the majority population in Rwanda and Burundi?
Hutu

What membrane in the cochlea bears the organ of Corti?
basilar membrane

What meteorological term describes a process in which there is rapid and sustained falling of barometric pressure in the center of a low-pressure system, indicative of its strengthening into a mighty storm?
bombogenesis

What microscopic club-shaped spore-bearing structure is produced by certain fungi?
basidium

What mixture of concentrated nitric and hydrochloric acids is a highly corrosive liquid that will dissolve gold and other resistant substances?
aqua regia `royal water'

What model of the celestial globe is constructed from rings and hoops representing the equator, the tropics, and other celestial circles and able to revolve on its axis?
armillary sphere

What monetary unit of Iceland is equal to one-hundredth of a krona?
eyrir

What monotheistic religion founded in the nineteenth century by the Persian Baha'ullah (1817--92) and his son Abdul Baha (1844--1921) as a development of Babism emphasizes the essential oneness of humankind and of all religions and seeking world peace?
Baha'i

What Moslawi was the first patriarch of the Chaldean Catholic Church, officially promulgated by Julius III's Divina disponente clementia in 1553?
Mar Shimun VIII Yohannan Sulaqa

What most widely grown coffee plant is from the family Rubiaceae (bedstraw family)?
arabica

What mother of Solomon was initially the wife of Uriah the Hittite and later one of David's wives?
Bathsheba

What mountain chain runs parallel to the Mediterranean coast, from Legridir in the west to the upper Euphrates River in the east?
Taurus Mountains

What mountain range in southern Arizona rises to 2,357 m at a peak of the same name?
Baboquivari (ˌbäbōkəˌvärē) Mountains

What mountain system stretches from Quebec and Maine to Georgia and Alabama and has its highest peak at Mt. Mitchell, NC?
Appalachian Mountains

What mountainous district in the Peloponnese of southern Greece represented a pastoral paradise in poetic fantasy and was the home of Pan in Greek mythology?
Arcadia

What mountainous Indonesian island whose chief city is Denpasar is noted for its beauty and the richness of its culture?
Bali

What mountainous peninsula in northwestern Mexico is also a state with its capital in Mexicali?
Baja California

What mountainous region in southern France was a province of the Roman Empire and contains extinct volcanic cones called ``the Puys''?
Auvergne

What mountainous region of western Asia, including part of southeastern Iran, southwestern Afghanistan, and western Pakistan, shares its name with a Pakistani province whose capital is in Quetta?
Baluchistan

What mountainous state of north-east India whose capital is Itanagar became a state in 1986?
Arunachal Pradesh

What mushroom or toadstool has pores rather than gills on the underside of the cap?
bolete

What mythical reptile has a lethal gaze or breath and is hatched by a serpent from a cock's egg?
basilisk

What name for a broad slope of alluvial material at the foot of an escarpment or mountain comes from Spanish for ``descent'' or ``slope''?
bajada

What name for a delicate rose-red variety's spinel comes from a district of Afghanistan where it is found?
balas ruby (Badakhshan)

What name for an occasion of wild and drunken revelry comes from the Latin name for Dionysus?
bacchanal

What did the Romans call Dionysus?
Bacchus

When Forrest Gump was in the army, what sport was he good at?
ping pong

What name for the Devil comes from the Hebrew for ``worthlessness''?
Belial

What name in heraldry is given to a broad diagonal stripe from the top right to bottom left of a shield (a supposed sign of bastardy)?
bend sinister

What name is given to a ballet enthusiast?
balletomane

What name is given to a bass singer with an exceptionally low range?
basso profundo

What name is given to a blue flag with a white square in the center, raised by a ship about to leave port?
Blue Peter

What name is given to a built-in housing for a ship's compass?
binnacle

What name is given to a company that sells stock without specifying how the company will spend the invested money?
blind pool

What name is given to a Cossack leader?
ataman

What name is given to a crescent-shaped sand dune that is concave on the leeward side?
barchan

What name is given to a cylinder or cone holding thread, yarn, or wire, used primarily in weaving, machine sewing, and lacemaking?
bobbin

What name is given to a district of a town in Spain and Spanish-speaking countries?
barrio

What name is given to a flat breaded roll topped with chopped onions?
bialy

What name is given to a flower's collective stamens?
androecium

What name is given to a legislative body with two branches or chambers?
bicameral

What name is given to a less prestigious dialect or variety of a particular language?
basilect

What name is given to a market in which prices are falling, encouraging selling?
bear market

What name is given to a mixture of two liquids with a constant boiling point and composition throughout distillation?
azeotrope

What name is given to a mutant organism (especially a bacterium or fungus) that requires a particular additional nutrient that the normal strain does not?
auxotroph

What name is given to a person who can reach nirvana but delays doing so out of compassion to save suffering beings in Mahayana Buddhism?
bodhisattva

What name is given to a person who charges a fee to criminal defendants in exchange for standing as surety for their bail?
bail bondsman

What name is given to a photo with two images superimposed and printed in different colour?
anaglyph

What name is given to a rod-shaped bacterium?
bacillus

What name is given to a roundel or a solid gold circle in heraldry?
bezant

What name is given to a sea that is running at approximately right angles to a vessel's heading?
beam sea

What name is given to a shanty town built of oil drums or other metal containers, especially on the outskirts of a North African city?
bidonville

What name is given to a thin rolled pancake filled with cheese or fruit and then fried or baked?
blintz

What name is given to an acronym deliberately formed from a phrase whose initial letters spell out a particular word or words, either to create a memorable name or as a fanciful explanation of a word's origin?
backronym

What name is given to an animal embryo at the early development stage when it is a hollow ball of cells?
blastula

What name is given to an association of different organisms forming a closely integrated community?
biocenosis

What name is given to an overhanging corner turret at the top of a castle or church tower?
bartizan

What name is given to any drug class that prevents the stimulation of the adrenergic receptors responsible for increased cardiac action?
beta-blocker

What name is given to each of a pair of plates or timbers fastened under the sides of a ship's hull to provide lateral resistance to the water, prevent rolling, and support its weight in dry dock?
bilge keel

What name is given to either a white wine or a light sparkling wine ([---] Spumante), both from an Italian region of the same name?
Asti

What name is given to either an extravagant book admirer or a literal Bible interpreter?
bibliolater

What name is given to either of two battles fought in 1777 during the American Revolution, the British defeat in both conflicts conventionally being regarded as the turning point of the war in America's favour?
Battle of Saratoga

What name is given to flora and fauna found on the bottom, or in the bottom sediments, of a sea, lake, or another water body?
benthos

What name is given to impure or low-grade cocaine mixed with coca paste, tobacco, and marijuana?
basuco

What name is given to several destructive diseases of pine trees caused by fungi of the genus Conartium, resulting in orange blisters on the bark and tips of branches?
blister rust

What name is given to software whose usefulness is reduced because of the excessive disk space and memory it requires?
bloatware

What name is given to someone undergoing psychoanalysis?
analysand

What name is given to someone's lowest body temperature at rest on a given day?
basal body temperature

What name is given to the central strand of a cilium or flagellum, composed of an array of microtubules, typically in nine pairs around two single central ones?
axoneme

What name is given to the ecological study of an individual organism or sometimes a particular species?
autecology

What name is given to the failure of an organ/tissue to develop or function normally?
aplasia

What name is given to the female sex organ in mosses, liverworts, ferns, and conifers?
archegonium

What name is given to the fiftieth wedding anniversary?
golden wedding

What name is given to the first milk produced by a cow or goat after giving birth?
beestings

What name is given to the first ten amendments to the United States Constitution, ratified in 1791?
Bill of Rights

What name is given to the fleshy filament growing from the mouth or snout of a fish?
barbel

What name is given to the fluid-filled cavity of a blastula?
blastocoel/segmentation cavity

What name is given to the formation of fatty plaques in the arteries?
atherogenesis

What name is given to the fortieth wedding anniversary?
ruby wedding

What name is given to the froth on fermenting malt liquor?
barm

What name is given to the German soldiers as a whole?
Boche

What name is given to the group of structures linked to the thalamus in the base of the brain that are involved in coordination of movement?
basal ganglia

What name is given to the inflammation of the eyelid?
blepharitis

What name is given to the insertion of a vowel between two consonants to aid pronunciation?
anaptyxis

What name is given to the involuntary tight closure of the eyelids?
blepharospasm

What name is given to the last battle between good and evil before the Day of Judgement?
Armageddon

What name is given to the loss of an unstressed vowel at the beginning of a word?
aphesis

What name is given to the measurement of the concentration or potency of a substance by its effect on living cells or tissues?
bioassay

What name is given to the minute filament projecting from the barb of a feather?
barbule

What name is given to the oldest known fossil bird?
archaeopteryx

What name is given to the omission or absence of a conjunction between parts of a sentence?
asyndeton

What name is given to the order inversion of words or clauses?
anastrophe

What name is given to the paralysis of the facial nerve causing muscular weakness in one side of the face?
Bell's palsy

What name is given to the projecting part of a fortification built at an angle to the wall line to allow for defensive fire in several directions?
bastion

What name is given to the proportion of a drug or other substance which enters the circulation when introduced into the body and so can have an active effect?
bioavailability

What name is given to the psychological phenomenon in which someone accepts certain information as accurate, such as character assessments or horoscopes, even when the data is so vague it may as well be worthless?
Barnum effect

What name is given to the series of lines in the visible and UV spectrum of atomic hydrogen, between 656 and 365 nm?
Balmer series

What name is given to the sixtieth or seventy-fifth wedding anniversary?
diamond wedding

What name is given to the special relationship in some societies between a man and his sister's son?
the avunculate

What name is given to the standard electrical brain activity when conscious and alert, consisting of oscillations with frequency 18--25 Hz?
beta rhythm

What name is given to the steepest angle at which a sloping surface formed of a particular loose material is stable?
angle of repose

What name is given to the study of Mars?
areology

What name is given to the study of therapeutic bathing and medicinal springs?
balneology

What name is given to the study or composition of essays?
belletrism

What name is given to the surgical immobilization of a joint by fusion of the adjacent bones?
arthrodesis

What name is given to the twenty-fifth wedding anniversary?
silver wedding

What name is given to the two-hundredth anniversary of an event?
bicentenary

What name is given to the unique pattern of a bodily feature such as the retina, iris, or voice, encoded on an identity card and used for recognition and identification purposes?
biometric signature

What name is given to the visual quality of the out-of-focus areas of a photographic image, especially as rendered by a particular lens?
bokeh

What name is given to the wavering cry of a sheep, goat, or calf?
bleat

What name is given to the windowed wall on the upper level of large churches, used to admit light and fresh air?
clerestory

What name is given to water in which chickpeas or other pulses have been cooked, used as a substitute for egg whites?
aquafaba

What is ``YHWH'' called?
the Tetragrammaton

What name of the New Testament is associated with the husband of Sapphira that was struck dead because he lied (Acts 5) and also the Jewish high priest before whom St. Paul was brought (Acts 23)?
Ananias

What name probably based on Arabic is given to the outer defence of a castle or walled city, especially a double tower above a gate or drawbridge?
barbican

What name was given to a member of a heretical medieval Balkan sect professing a modified form of Manichaeism?
Bogomil

What name was given to a member of the majority faction of the Russian Social Democratic Party, which was renamed the Communist Party after seizing power in the October Revolution of 1917?
Bolshevik

What name was given to each of the nine chief magistrates in ancient Athens?
archon

What name was given to the administrative system of a communist party?
apparat

What name was given to the burning of a heretic by the Spanish Inquisition?
auto-da-fé

What name was given to the crewed submersible vessel used by the Swiss deep-sea explorer Auguste Piccard (1884--1962)?
bathyscaphe

What name was given to the Saracen countries of north and northwestern Africa and Moorish Spain? The area was noted between the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries as a haunt of pirates.
Barbary

What name was given to two papal bulls issued by Eugene III: the first calling for the Italian clergy's support in the Second Crusade, and the second calling for the Wendish Crusade against the pagan Slavs?
Divina dispensatione

What narrow corridor of disputed desert in northern Chad forms the border between Chad and Libya and saw the withdrawal of Libyan troops in 1994?
Aouzou Strip

What narrow opaque band encircles the cornea, typical in old age?
arcus senilis

What narrow, mountainous peninsula in north-east Greece, projecting into the Aegean, is inhabited by monks of the Orthodox Church who forbid women and female animals to set foot there?
Mount Athos

What naturally occurring steroid hormone, also available as a dietary supplement, is believed to increase levels of serum testosterone?
androstenedione

What New Zealander was the first woman to fly from England to Australia and back (1934--35)?
Jean Batten

What nickname was given to a partial female skeleton of a fossil hominid found in Ethiopia in 1994?
Ardi

What North American appetizer consists of a crêpe stuffed with a savoury filling, typically caviar and crème fraiche?
beggar's purse

What North Korean sporting club named after the nation's Military Foundation Day is primarily known outside of North Korea for its men's and women's soccer teams and belongs to the Ministry of People's Armed Forces?
25 April Sports Club

What Northern Irish rectangular basin has a drain at one end and is traditionally made of glazed white porcelain?
Belfast sink

What Norwegian seaport is the centre of the fishing and North Sea oil industries?
Bergen

What noun whose name comes from a delicious dessert and starts with ``a'' means ``perfect order'' or ``neatness''?
apple-pie order

What noun that comes from the Latin for ``judge of elegance'' and used by Tacitus to describe Gauis Petronius refers to a judge of artistic taste and etiquette?
arbiter elegantiarum/elegantiae

What noun in logic denotes the existence of only two states or truth values?
bivalence

What noun is used for either the absence or abnormal narrowing of an opening or passage in the body or the degeneration of those ovarian follicles that do not ovulate during menstruation?
atresia

What noun refers to thoroughbred horses considered collectively?
bloodstock

What numerical verb means ``eject or bar (someone) from a restaurant, bar, etc.''?
eighty-six

What object or design resembles a cross but has a loop in place of a top arm and was used in ancient Egypt as a symbol of life?
ankh

What oil or gas lamp invented by a French physicist allowed for more complete combustion of the candle wick and brighter light (6--10 cd)?
Argand lamp

What oldest political party of Australia, founded in 1891, is moderately liberal and has had recent (c. 2021) prime ministers like Whitlam, Hawke, and Keating?
ALP (Australian Labour Party)

What Omani currency is equal to one-thousandth of a rial?
baisa

What only port of Jordan is at the head of a gulf with the same name?
Aqaba

What orange-yellow pigment, formed in the liver by the breakdown of hemoglobin, is excreted in bile?
bilirubin

What order consisting of tailless amphibians and comprising the frogs and toads is also called ``Anura'' or ``Salientia''?
Batrachia

What Oxonian museum of art and antiquities opened in 1683 and was the first public institution of its kind in England?
Ashmolean Museum

What pair of cartilages at the back of the larynx is used in the production of different kinds of voice quality?
arytenoids

What pair of glands lying near the entrance of the vagina secretes a fluid that lubricates the vulva?
Bartholin's glands

What pair of posts on a ship deck is used for fastening mooring lines or cables?
bitts

What Palestinian statesman shared the 1994 Nobel Peace Prize with Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres for the signing of a PLO-Israeli peace accord?
Yasser Arafat

What pan-Arab political party founded in Syria in 1943 has different factions that hold power in Syria and once held power in Iraq, its name coming from the Arabic for ``resurrection''?
Baath Party

What papal bull (more commonly called ``the Golden Bull of Rieti'') issued by Gregory IX on 3 Aug. 1234 confirmed the Teutonic Order's domination of the Chelmno land (Kulmerland) east of the lower Vistula and other lands conquered by Teutonic Order in Prussia ``to eternal and absolute ownership''?
Pietati proximum

What papal bull issued by Alexander III on 23 May 1179 recognized Afonso Henriques as the first sovereign King of Portugal?
Manifestis Probatum

What papal bull issued by Boniface VIII on 25 Feb. 1296 excommunicated members of the clergy who, without authorization from the Holy See, paid laymen any part of their income or the Church's revenue and all rulers who received such payments?
Clericis laicos

What papal bull issued by Clement IV on 26 Jul. 1267 addressed Dominican and Franciscan Friars on the issue of Jews converting Christians to Judaism?
Turbato corde

What papal bull issued by Innocent III called for the Fifth Crusade?
Quia maior

What papal bull issued by Innocent III in 1205 allowed Jews to have their own houses of worship, did not force Jews to convert, but forbade Jews to eat with Christians or own Christian slaves?
Esti Judaeos

What papal bull issued by Innocent IV in 1243 ordered a crusade to the Baltic lands?
Qui iustis causis

What papal bull issued by Innocent IV on 15 May 1252 authorized the use of torture for eliciting confessions from heretics during the Inquisition and executing relapsed heretics by burning them alive?
Ad extirpanda

What papal bull issued by Innocent IV on 23 Jan. 1245 called for a crusade to the Holy Land after Louis IX of France had declared his intention to go on a crusade to the Holy Land in Dec. 1244?
Terra Sancta Christi

What papal bull issued by Innocent IV ordered the burning of the Talmud on 9 Mar. 1244?
Impia gens

What papal bull issued by Lucius III after the Council of Verona on 4 Nov. 1184 aimed at abolishing Christian heresy and culminated in the Albigensian Crusade and the Inquisitions?
Ad abolendam diversam haeresium pravitatem `To abolish diverse malignant heresies'

What papal bull issued by Pope Clement VIII on 3 Feb. 1603 considered Marian piety the basis of the Church and condemned many issues considered erroneous, including the denial of the virginity of Mary?
Dominici gregis

What papal bull issued on 6 Apr. 1233 by Gregory IX demanded that Jews in Christian countries be treated with the same humanity with which Christians wish to be treated in heathen lands?
Etsi Judaeorum

What papal bull issued on 22 Dec. 1216 by Honorius III gave universal recognition to the Dominican Order?
Religiosam vitam

What papal bull promulgated by Boniface VIII on 27 Jun. 1299 challenged Edward I's claim to Scotland, stating the Scottish kingdom belonged to the apostolic see?
Scimus, Fili

What papal bull promulgated by Gregory X in 1274 established the papal conclave during the Second Council of Lyon?
Ubi Periculum `Where there is danger'

What papal bull was issued annually between 1363 and 1770, at first on Holy Thursday and later on Easter Monday?
In coena Domini `At the table of the Lord'

What papal bull with a brilliant name and promulgated by Alexander IV focused on the canonization of St. Clare of Assisi?
Clara claris praeclara

What parasitic nematode worms typically live in the intestines of vertebrates?
ascarids

What part of the Red Sea extends northward between the Sinai and Arabian peninsulas?
Gulf of Aqaba

What part of the Rocky Mountains is found in western Montana and eastern Idaho?
Bitterroot Range

What patron goddess of Athens (worshipped as the goddess of wisdom, handicrafts, and warfare) is often allegorized into a personification of wisdom and also called ``Pallas''?
Athena

What patron saint of tanners has his feast day on 24 August?
St. Bartholomew

What peninsula in Northern Territory, Australia was named after Willem Joosten van Colster's ship, which itself was named after a city in the Netherlands?
Arnhem Land

What Philippine peninsula and province on western Luzon, bounded by Manila Bay and the South China Sea, was the site of World War II battles and the ``Death March''?
Bataan

What philosophical concept, the opposite of holism, regards something as interpretable through analysis into distinct, separable, and independent elementary components?
atomism

What Phoenician goddess of fertility and sexual love corresponded to the Babylonian and Assyrian goddess Ishtar and became identified with the Egyptian Isis, the Greek Aphrodite, and others?
Astarte

What phrase involving two Greek mythological figures is used to refer to a situation involving two dangers in which an attempt to avoid one increases the risk from the other?
between Scylla and Charybdis

What plant pigment is essential in the diet as a precursor of vitamin A?
beta-carotene

What poem or song narrating a story is in short stanzas and traditionally of unknown authorship?
ballad

What Polish-born American pianist who toured extensively in Europe and the United States recorded the complete works of Chopin?
Artur Rubinstein

What pontiff was the first not to be canonized a saint?
Liberius

What pope called for the Second Crusade with the bull Quantum praedecessores?
Eugene III

What pope called for the Third Crusade with the papal bull Audita tremendi on 20 October 1187?
Gregory VIII

What pope canonized St. Dominic on 3 July 1234 with the bull Fons Sapientiae?
Gregory IX

What pope canonized St. Francis of Assisi with the bull Mira Circa Nos in 1228?
Gregory IX

What pope convoked the First Vatican Council?
Pius IX

What pope convoked the Second Vatican Council?
John XXIII

What pope declared Elizabeth I of England a heretic and released her subjects from any allegiance to her with the bull Regnans in excelsis on 25 February 1570?
Pius V

What pope declared the Magna Carta ``null, and void of all validity for ever,'' favouring King John against the barons in the bull Pro rege Johanne?
Innocent III

What pope defined the dogma of the Assumption of Mary in the apostolic constitution Munificentissimus Deus in 1950?
Pius XII

What pope defined the dogma of the Immaculate Conception in the bull Ineffabilis Deus in 1854?
Pius IX

What pope promulgated Orat mater ecclesia on 30 January 1291 to protect Roman Jews from oppression?
Nicholas IV

What pope promulgated Summis desiderantes affectibus in 1484, a bull condemning an alleged outbreak of witchcraft and heresy in the region of the Rhine River valley and deputizing Heinrich Kramer and Jacob Sprenger as inquisitors to root out alleged witchcraft in Germany?
Innocent VIII

What pope suppressed the Society of Jesus in 1773 with the bull Dominus ac Redemptor noster, a decision nullified partially by Pius VII in 1814 and entirely by Leo XIII in 1880?
Clement XIV

What port in Argentina serving the southern part of the country is the location of Napostá Stream?
Bahía Blanca

What port on the Adriatic coast of Italy is the capital of the Marche region?
Ancona

What port on the Irrawaddy delta in southern Myanmar is the site of Shwemokhtaw Pagoda and was part of the Mon kingdom?
Pathein

What portable breathing apparatus for divers consists of cylinders of compressed air strapped on the diver's back and feeds air automatically through a mask or mouthpiece?
Aqua-Lung

What posture is adopted when performing hatha yoga?
asana

What preserve in northern Maine incorporates Mount Katahdin and the north end of the Appalachian Trail?
Baxter State Park

What primitive, undifferentiated blood cell is often found in the blood of those with acute leukemia?
blast cell

What principal headwater of the Nile River rises from Lake Tana in northwestern Ethiopia?
Blue Nile

What process involves extracting metals from ores or waste by using microorganisms to oxidize the metals, producing soluble compounds?
bioleaching

What Progressive Conservative was Canada's first female prime minister?
Kim Campbell

What protein present in the bacterium Halobacterium halobium transports protons across the cytoplasmic membrane when illuminated?
bacteriorhodopsin

What protein promotes aldosterone secretion and raises blood pressure?
angiotensin

What protein with a prosthetic group forms a biochemical molecule such as a hormone or enzyme?
apoprotein

What psychological theory supposes that one attempts to understand the behaviour of others by attributing feelings, beliefs, and intentions to them?
attribution theory

What queen of the Britons and ruler of the Iceni tribe of eastern England led her forces in a revolt against the Romans and sacked Colchester, St. Albans, and London before being defeated by the Roman governor, Suetonius Paulinus?
Boudicca

What queen was nicknamed Bloody Mary?
Mary I of England

What range of mountains in SW Saudi Arabia runs parallel to the Red Sea?
Asir Mountains

What rare word from the Greek for ``without position'' means ``reject (a passage in a text) as spurious''?
athetize

What rawhide typically formed into strips is used by North American Indians to make fastenings, animal snares, and snowshoes and comes from a Mi'kmaq word?
babiche

What red supergiant in Orion is the tenth-brightest star in the sky?
Betelgeuse

What reflex action involves the big toe remaining extended or extending itself when the sole is stimulated?
Babinski reflex

What region and former province of south-west France on the Bay of Biscay and centred on Bordeaux became an English possession by the marriage of Eleanor to Henry II in 1152 and had its capital in Toulouse?
Aquitaine

What region forms the western part of the Czech Republic?
Bohemia

What region in eastern Europe, formerly part of Romania, lies between the Dniester and Prut Rivers in Moldova and Ukraine?
Bessarabia

What region in eastern France produces red burgundy wine?
Beaune

What region in Scandinavian mythology is the centre of the universe inhabited by the gods?
Asgard

What region of northwestern France on the coast of the English channel includes the Cherbourg peninsula and Caen?
Basse-Normandie

What region of the hypothalamus is believed to control appetite?
appestat

What region of the Karakoram Range of the Himalayas, to the south of K2, is also called ``Little Tibet''?
Baltistan

What region of the western Pyrenees straddles the France-Spain border on the Bay of Biscay?
Basque Country

What religion was founded in 1844 by the Persian Mirza Ali Muhammad of Shiraz, who taught that a new prophet would follow Muhammad?
Babism

What reservoir and recreational centre in southern California is located in the San Bernardino Mountains east of Los Angeles?
Big Bear Lake

What resort town on Mount Desert Island in Maine is home to the College of the Atlantic, Jackson Laboratory, and MDI Biological Laboratory?
Bar Harbor

What result states that a body totally or partially immersed in a fluid is subject to an upward force equal in magnitude to the weight of fluid it displaces?
Archimedes's principle

What rich sauce whose name comes from the name of a region of southwest France is thickened with egg yolks and flavoured with tarragon?
Béarnaise sauce

What rich white sauce, whose name comes from the steward to Louis XIV of France who is said to have invented a similar sauce, is made with milk infused with herbs and other flavourings?
béchamel

What rite of sprinkling holy water at the beginning of the Christian Mass derives its name from the first word of the Latin text of Psalms 50.7?
asperges

What river flows 725 km through central Mexico, through Puebla, Guerrero, and Michoacán states, and into the Pacific Ocean?
Rio Balsas

What river flows from central to northern Bolivia, east of the Andes, into the Madeira River?
Beni River

What river flows from northern Cameroon into Nigeria, where it joins the Niger River?
Benue River

What river flows from northern New Hampshire through south-west Maine into the Atlantic?
Androscoggin River

What river forms part of the Russia-China border?
Amur/Heilong

What river in Louisiana that flows into the Gulf of Mexico controls flooding on the Red and Mississippi Rivers?
Atchafalaya River

What river in northern India that rises in the Himalayas and flows through Himachal Pradesh to join the Sutlej River in Punjab is one of the five rivers that gave Punjab its name?
Beas

What river in south-east Siberia flows northwest and west for over 1,000 miles from Lake Baikal to the Yenisei River?
Angara River

What river is known as Big Muddy?
Missouri River

What river known as the Oxus in classical times rises in the Pamirs and flows into the Aral Sea?
Amu Darya

What river port in central Belarus is located on the Berezina River southeast of Minsk?
Babruisk

What river port in southern Bangladesh on the Ganges delta is home to Guthia Mosque and near Durga Sagar, the largest lake of south Bangladesh?
Barisal

What Roman poet called the Appian Way longarum regina viarum `queen of long-distance roads'?
Statius/Horace

What Roman writer who wrote Metamorphoses (Asinus aureus) is characterized by his exuberant and bizarre use of language?
Apuleius

What runaway slave in a story by Aulus Gellius extracted a thorn from the paw of a lion, which later recognized him and refrained from attacking him when he faced it in the arena?
Androcles

What Russian chess player was world champion until he was defeated by Kasparov in 1985?
Anatoli Karpov

What Russian city is noted for the largest monument of Vladimir Lenin's head in the world?
Ulan-Ude

What Russian guitar-like musical instrument has a triangular body typically with three strings?
balalaika

What Russian-born pianist was a child prodigy who left the Soviet Union in 1963 and finally settled in Iceland in 1973?
Vladimir Davidovich Ashkenazy

What Russian-born American writer and scientist coined the term ``robotics'' and wrote I, Robot (1950) and Foundation (trilogy, 1951--53)?
Isaac Asimov

What Russian-derived name is given to pancakes made from buckwheat flour and served with sour cream?
blini

What sailing ship usually with three masts has the foremast and mainmast square-rigged and the mizzenmast rigged fore-and-aft?
barque

What sandwich in Vietnamese cuisine consists of a baguette filled with various ingredients, typically including meat, pickled vegetables, and chilli peppers, its name coming from the Vietnamese for ``bread''?
banh mi

What sauce in Filipino cooking is made from fermented or salted fish and used as a condiment?
bagoong

What Sauk leader fought to repossess North American Indian lands in an 1832 war?
Black Hawk

What savoury jelly made with meat stock, set in a mould, and used to contain pieces of meat, seafood, or eggs comes from the French for a snake with the same name?
aspic

What scale measures intelligence by applying a test consisting of tasks and problems graded in terms of mental age?
Binet-Simon scale

What scale with arbitrary markings is used with a hydrometer to measure the relative density of liquids?
Baumé scale

What Scandinavian alcoholic spirit is made from potatoes or other starchy plants?
akvavit/aquavit

What scarp marks the geologic fault separating the plains of eastern Texas from highlands to the west, San Antonio, Austin, and Waco lying near it?
Balcones Escarpment

What Scottish novelist created Sherlock Holmes?
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle

What Scottish tennis player won Olympic singles gold in 2012 and 2016 and was the first male Brit to win a grand slam singles tournament since 1936?
Sir Andrew Murray

What SCOTUS associate justice is noted as the author of Roe v. Wade?
Harry Blackmun

What SCOTUS case gave congress power to establish a national bank and did not give states the power to tax the national bank?
McCulloch v. Maryland (1819)

What SCOTUS case held 5--4 that the 14th Amendment guarantees the right to marry, including same-sex marriages?
Obergefell v. Hodges (2015)

What SCOTUS case ruled that a university's use of racial quotas in its admissions process was unconstitutional, but a school's use of affirmative action was constitutional in some circumstances?
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke (1978)

What SCOTUS case ruled that anti-abortion laws violate the Constitution's right to privacy?
Roe v. Wade (1973)

What SCOTUS case ruled that any individual charged with a felony will be guaranteed the free assistance of legal counsel if the individual cannot pay for a lawyer?
Gideon v. Wainwright (1963)

What SCOTUS case ruled that it is the federal government's role to regulate commerce and that state governments cannot develop commerce-regulating laws?
Gibbons v. Ogden (1824)

What SCOTUS case ruled that the First Amendment prohibits public school officials from barring students from wearing black armbands to symbolize anti-war political protest?
Tinker v. Des Moines (1969)

What SCOTUS case unanimously overturned Plessy v. Ferguson, ruling that racially segregated public schools violate the Equal Protection Clause?
Brown v. Board of Education (1954)

What SCOTUS case was central to the issue of slavery?
Dred Scott v. Sanford (1857)

What sea carries an estimated third of global shipping?
South China Sea

What sea in Russia and Ukraine is separated from the Black Sea by Crimea?
Sea of Azov

What sea is bounded by northern Australia, eastern Indonesia, and New Guinea?
Arafura Sea

What sea of the Arctic Ocean is to the north of Norway and Russia, bounded to the west by Svalbard, to the north by Franz Josef Land, and to the east by Novaya Zemlya?
Barents Sea

What sea of the southeastern Pacific off the Antarctic coast is bounded to the east and south by the Antarctic Peninsula and Ellsworth Land?
Bellingshausen Sea

What second-largest city in Lebanon is renowned for its Citadel of Raymond de Saint-Gilles?
Tripoli

What section of northwest Queens in New York City is noted for its sizeable Greek-American population?
Astoria

What sensitive electrical instrument is used for measuring radiant energy?
bolometer

What set of sacred Hindu treatises based on the Brahmanas and written in Sanskrit contains mystical and philosophical material and explications of esoteric rites?
Aranyakas

What severe congenital condition results in the absence of a large part of the skull and the cerebral hemispheres of the brain?
anencephaly

What shallow one-sided Irish drum is commonly played with a short two-headed drumstick?
bodhrán

What sheet of pearly white fibrous tissue takes the place of a tendon in flat muscles and has a wide area of attachment?
aponeurosis

What Shiite Muslim leader established Iran as a fundamentalist Islamic republic?
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini

What short loaf of French bread has an oval or oblong shape?
batard

What simplest type of sponge is in the form of a tube or bag lined with choanocytes?
ascon

What sizeable shallow lake in west-central Hungary is situated in a wine-producing and resort region south of the Bakony mountains?
Lake Balaton

What small and densely staining structure in the cell nuclei of female mammals consists of a condensed, inactive X chromosome and is regarded as diagnostic of genetic femaleness?
Barr body

What small and faint southern constellation (the Altar) is found in the Milky Way near Scorpius?
Ara

What small hunting dog of a central African breed growls and yelps but does not bark?
basenji

What small northern constellation containing Altair represents the eagle that carried Ganymede to Olympus and shares its name with the capital of Abruzzi, Italy?
Aquila

What small pointed tool is used for piercing holes, especially in leather?
awl

What small shoaling fish is a calcium-rich herring relative that is enjoyed by some on pizza?
anchovy

What small songbird with a curved bill, typically with a white stripe over the eye, a sooty gray back, and yellow underparts, is widespread in the West Indies and Central and South America?
bananaquit

What small southern European viper has an upturned snout (Vipera aspis) and shares its name with another term for Egyptian cobra?
asp

What small, rich sponge cake is typically soaked in rum-flavoured syrup and has a name that means ``married peasant woman''?
baba au rhum

What small, sturdy dog breed has a curly white coat and a tail that curves over its back?
Bichon Frisé

What son of Odin and god of the summer sun was invulnerable to all things except mistletoe, with which the god Loki induced the blind god Hödur to kill him by a trick?
Balder

What son of Pelops and father of Agamemnon and Menelaus quarrelled with his brother Thyestes and invited him to a banquet at which he served up the flesh of Thyestes' children?
Atreus

What song is traditionally sung by Venetian gondoliers?
barcarolle

What South African city east of Johannesburg is a gold-mining centre?
Benoni

What South African city is the country's judicial capital and the capital of Orange Free State?
Bloemfontein

What South African surgeon was a pioneer in human heart transplantation, performing the first heart transplant in December 1967?
Christiaan Barnard

What South African town is the capital of Eastern Cape?
Bhisho

What South American weapon consists of several balls connected by a strong cord, which entangles the quarry's limbs when thrown?
bola

What South Korean city has the world's largest shipyard, oil refinery, and automobile assembly plant?
Ulsan

What South Korean diplomat was secretary general of the United Nations from 2007 to 2016?
Ban Ki-moon

What southeastern Uzbek city is one of the oldest trade centers in central Asia and noted for its production of karakul fleeces?
Bukhara

What southern Sumatran city was created in the 1980s as a result of the amalgamation of the municipality of Tanjungkarang and the nearby port of Telukbetung?
Bandar Lampung

What southernmost region of Spain has its capital in Seville and was under Moorish rule from 711 to 1492?
Andalusia

What Soviet statesman, general secretary of the Communist Party of the former Soviet Union 1982--84 and president 1983--84, initiated the reform process carried out by Gorbachev, his successor?
Yuri Andropov

What spa town in eastern Austria coming from an obsolete German word for ``baths'' is south of Vienna and noted for its warm mineral springs?
Baden

What spa town in northern Bosnia and Herzegovina served as a base for Bosnian Serbs during their war against Bosnian Muslims in the 1990s?
Banja Luka

What spa town in the Black Forest in SW Germany comes from an obsolete German word for ``baths'' and has the River Oos flowing through it?
Baden-Baden

What Spanish mystic's writings are associated with Quietism?
Miguel de Molinos

What Spanish naval invasion force sent against England by Philip II of Spain in 1588 was defeated by the English fleet and almost destroyed by storms off the Hebrides?
Spanish Armada

What Spanish-born Islamic philosopher, judge, and physician wrote highly influential commentaries on Aristotle that sought to reconcile the Greek philosophical tradition with the Arabic?
Averroës (ibn-Rushd)

What square cap with three flat projections on top is worn by Roman Catholic clergymen?
biretta

What stadium is home to AC Milan and Inter Milan?
San Siro (Stadio Giuseppe Meazza)

What stadium is home to Al-Ittihad?
Aleppo International Stadium

What stadium is home to AS Roma and SS Lazio?
Stadio Olimpico, Rome

What stadium is home to Atlético Madrid?
Vincente Calderón Stadium

What stadium is home to Bayern Munich?
Allianz Area

What stadium is home to Borussia Dortmund?
Signal Iduna Park

What stadium is home to Club América?
Estadio Azteca

What stadium is home to Esteghlal FC and Persepolis FC?
Azadi Stadium, Tehran

What stadium is home to FC Barcelona?
Camp Nou

What stadium is home to FC Zenit St. Petersburg?
Krestovsky Stadium (Gazprom Arena)

What stadium is home to Ferencvárosi TC?
Groupama Aréna, Budapest

What stadium is home to Hertha BSC?
Olympiastadion, Berlin

What stadium is home to Liverpool?
Anfield

What stadium is home to Manchester United?
Old Trafford

What stadium is home to Real Madrid?
Santiago Bernabéu Stadium

What stadium is home to River Plate?
Estadio Monumental Antonio Vespucio Liberti, Buenos Aires

What stadium is home to Sepahan FC?
Naghsh-e-Jahan Stadium, Isfahan

What stadium is home to the Kaizer Chiefs?
FNB Stadium

What stadium is the world's largest?
Rungrado 1 May Stadium, Pyongyang

What standard form of Norwegian comes from a modified form of Danish?
Bokmål

What state in north-east India with its capital in Dispur lies in the Brahmaputra River valley and is noted for tea production?
Assam

What state is also known as ``the Bay State''?
Massachusetts

What state is known as ``the Battleborn State''?
Nevada

What state is known as ``the Big Bend State''?
Tennessee

What state is known as ``the Baked Bean State''?
Massachusetts

What state is known as ``the Beaver State''?
Oregon

What state is known as ``the Beehive State''?
Utah

What state is known as ``the Blue Hen State''?
Delaware

What state is known as ``the Blue Law State''?
Connecticut

What state is known as ``the Bluegrass State''?
Kentucky

What state is nicknamed ``Big Sky Country''?
Montana

What state is nicknamed ``the Bayou State''?
Louisiana

What state is the Badger State?
Wisconsin

What state of eastern Brazil has its capital in Salvador, which formerly had this name?
Bahia

What state of existence between death and rebirth varies in length according to a person's conduct in life and manner of or age at death?
bardo

What state's capital is Hyderabad?
Andhra Pradesh

What statement of the Lutheran position was drawn up mainly by Melanchthon and approved by Luther before being presented to Emperor Charles V on 25 June 1530?
Augsburg Confession

What steroid pheromone produced by some mammals is sometimes marketed as an ingredient in preparations claimed to have aphrodisiac properties in humans and was initially identified in boar saliva?
androstenone

What steroid resembles testosterone in promoting muscle growth and is used illegally by athletes to enhance performance?
anabolic steroid

What stick is used by some indigenous peoples of North America to propel a spear or dart?
atlatl

What stocky bird is found in Madagascar?
asity

What style of painting uses thin, typically transparent, watercolours?
aquarelle

What subatomic particle has a mass equal to or greater than that of a proton?
baryon

What substance prevents the multiplying of bacteria without destroying them?
bacteriostat

What substance was used in fire extinguishers?
BCF (bromochlorodifluoromethane)

What succession of sea operations during World War II involved Axis naval and air forces attempting to destroy shipping carrying supplies from North America to the United Kingdom?
Battle of the Atlantic

What sugar of the pentose class (an aldose) is a constituent of many plant gums and is a classic example of Wohl degradation from glucose?
arabinose

What summary and analysis of economic activity and conditions is prepared with the aid of reports from the district Federal Reserve Banks and issued by the central bank of the Federal Reserve for its policymakers before a Federal Open Market Committee meeting?
Beige Book

What surgical operation removes the appendix?
appendectomy

What south-western American river flows from the Rockies in Colorado to the Mississippi and has been made navigable for oceangoing vessels as far west as Tulsa, Oklahoma
Arkansas River

What Swedish chemist noted for his work on electrolytes won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry (1903)?
Svante August Arrhenius

(feast day: 1 February) What Swedish nun and visionary experienced her first vision of the Virgin Mary at seven?
St. Bridget

What sweet wine comes from a district and department of the Gironde of the same name?
Barsac

What synthetic polymers related to nylon yield thermally-stable fibres of exceptional strength?
aramids

What Syrian statesman, the father of the current Syrian president (c. 2022), ensured the strengthening of Syria's oil-based economy, suppressed political opposition such as the uprising of Muslim extremists (1979--82), and supported the coalition forces during the 1991 Gulf War while in office?
Hafiz al-Assad

What syrup do Sikhs consider divine and drink at religious observances?
amrit

What system of reduced fares for scheduled airline flights and railroad journeys must be booked and paid for before a certain period in advance of departure?
Apex (Advance Purchase Excursion)

What system of units formerly used in pharmacy for liquid volume was based on the fluid ounce and the ounce troy?
apothecaries' measure/weight

What system of weights was based on a pound of 16 ounces or 7,000 grains?
avoirdupois

What is the national language of the Philippines?
Tagalog

What tartar is obtained from wine fermentation?
argol

What team did Larry Bird coach from 1997 to 2000?
Indiana Pacers

What temperature-sensitive electrical contact used in some thermostats consists of two bands of different metals joined face to face along their lengths?
bimetallic strip

What term coined by George Bernard Shaw is given to an excessive admiration of Shakespeare?
bardolatry

What term is given to an abnormal excess of nitrogen compounds in the urine?
azoturia

What term is given to the distance between the back of a lens and an object's image at infinity?
back focus

What term is used for the partial or complete collapse of the lung?
atelectasis

What term meaning ``soldier's tent'' was used for an enclosure in which slaves or convicts were confined for a limited period?
barracoon

What term of ancient Egypt is given to a person's or god's supposed soul, which survived after death but had to be sustained with food offerings, typically represented as a human-headed bird?
ba

What term referring to any of a number of ornamental plants that bear small double flowers can refer to a white flower of the daisy family or a yellow buttercup?
bachelor's buttons

What term used in parts of Asia and North Africa is given to a small sum of money given as a tip, bribe, or charitable donation?
baksheesh

What thick mixture of flour, water, and yeast is allowed to ferment for some time before being combined with fresh dough to make bread and used in Italian baking?
biga

What thick sauce or spread made from ground eggplant and sesame seeds, olive oil, lemon, and garlic is typical of eastern Mediterranean cuisine and comes from the Arabic for ``father''?
baba ghanouj

What thin, delicate membrane of protein fibres and glycosaminoglycans separates an epithelium from underlying tissue?
basement membrane

What thinly populated wooded plateau in north-east France was the location of a significant Allied offensive during WWI and occupied by Germany during World War II?
Argonne

What three islands comprise the Aran Islands?
Inishmore, Inishmaan, Inisheer

What tidal body in southeastern New Jersey is shielded from the Atlantic Ocean by barrier islands and the site of numerous resorts?
Barnegat Bay

What tideless, nearly landlocked sea is bounded by Ukraine, Russia, Georgia, Turkey, Bulgaria, and Romania and connected to the Mediterranean Sea through the Bosporus and the Sea of Marmara?
Black Sea

What Titan punished for his part in the Titans' revolt against Zeus by being made to support the heavens is identified with a mountain range of the same name?
Atlas

What topical antibiotic used for skin and eye infections is obtained from the bacterium Bacillus subtilis?
bacitracin

What topmost vertebra of the backbone articulates with the occipital bone of the skull?
atlas vertebra

What tough wove fabric has prominent ridges similar to corduroy and is named after an English town?
Bedford cord

What town in eastern Lebanon is the site of the ancient city Heliopolis?
Baalbek

What town in north-east France was a centre for the manufacture of tapestries in medieval times?
Arras

What town in south-eastern Belgium was the scene of heavy fighting during the Battle of the Bulge in World War II?
Bastogne

What town in the Netherlands is the site of the summer residence of the Dutch royal family?
Apeldoorn

What town lies across the River Mersey from Liverpool?
Birkenhead

What trademarked artificial grass surface is used for athletic fields?
AstroTurf

What triangular promontory in eastern Greece forms a Greek department with the islands in the Saronic Gulf of which Athens is the capital?
Attica

What trick-taking card game for two is played with a double pack of sixty-four cards, including the seven to ace only in each suit?
bezique

What type of barometer is operated by the movement of the elastic lid of a box exhausted of air?
aneroid

What type of brandy is traditionally made in Aquitaine in south-west France?
Armagnac

What type of bridge has a pivoting section that is raised and lowered using counterweights?
bascule

What type of camel has two humps?
Bactrian camel

What type of hatha yoga is characterized by a set series of postures and breathing exercises and performed in a room heated to a very high temperature?
Bikram yoga

What type of Japanese porcelain is characterized by asymmetric decoration and named after the city in which it is made?
Arita

What type of jazz is associated with Charlie Parker, Thelonious Monk, and Dizzy Gillespie?
bebop

What type of knot is used by anglers to join two fishing lines?
blood knot

What type of light antiaircraft gun was named after the place in which it was first manufactured?
Bofors gun

In what type of long-distance road cycling event must participants navigate a route within a specified time?
audax

What type of quasar is an intense, irregularly variable source of highly polarized light, thought to arise from a plasma jet pointing in the earth's direction?
blazar

What type of remote elliptical galaxy, remarked for its considerable short-term variations in brightness and radio emissions, has a very compact starlike nucleus?
BL Lac object

What type of vocal music is more melodic than recitative but less formal than an aria?
arioso

What type of yoga based on eight principles and consisting of a series of poses executed in swift succession comes from the Sanskrit for ``having eight parts''?
ashtanga

What typically dried or salted codfish is used in Spanish and Latin American cooking?
bacalao

What uninhabited island in the central Pacific Ocean near the equator and claimed by the United States in 1857 was once a guano source but is now a wildlife refuge?
Baker Island

What unit of area is equal to $10^{-28}\ \text{m}^2$ and used primarily in particle physics?
barn

What unit of transmission speed is equal to the number of times a signal changes state per second or one bit per second?
baud

What upper layer of the earth's mantle below the lithosphere is the location of relatively low resistance to plastic flow and convection?
asthenosphere

What American actress is best known for her movie appearance in Alfred Hitchcock's lifeboat (1944)?
Tallulah Bankhead

What American attorney general (2001--05) reorganized the Justice Department to focus on antiterrorism following 9/11?
John David Ashcroft

What American basketball coach is noted for his nine hundred and two career wins and coaching the United States Olympic team to gold in 1984?
Bobby Knight

What American basketball coach led the Celtics to nine NBA championships (1957, 1959--66)?
Red Auerbach

What American botanist found no conflict between evolution and his view of divine design in nature and thus supported Darwin's theories when they were unpopular, showing that science and religion were not necessarily mutually exclusive?
Asa Gray

What American electrical engineer invented the superheterodyne radio receiver and the FM system?
Edwin Howard Armstrong

What American historian and writer wrote books like Mayday: Eisenhower, Khrushchev, and the U-2 affair (1986), The crisis years: Kennedy and Khrushchev, 1960--1963 (1991), and The conquerors: Roosevelt, Truman, and the destruction of Hitler's Germany, 1941--1945 (2002)?
Michael Beschloss

What American inventor, astronomer, and mathematician published an almanac 1791--1802 that featured his astronomical and tide calculations and was hired to assist in surveying the District of Columbia 1790 on the recommendation of Thomas Jefferson?
Benjamin Banneker

What American jazz drummer was a pioneer of the bebop movement and was known for his group, the Jazz Messengers?
Art Blakey

What American jazz musician (trumpeter, cornetist, and singer) nicknamed ``Satchmo'' had a significant influence on Dixieland jazz and appeared in movies like High society (1956) and Hello, Dolly! (1969)?
Louis Armstrong

What American painter and graphic artist is noted for pop art?
Andy Warhol

What American physicist demonstrated wave-particle duality as predicted by quantum theory, winning the Nobel Prize for Physics (1927) with C. T. R. Wilson?
Arthur Holly Compton

What American political activist and writer wrote Women, race, and class (1981)?
Angela Davis

What American singer and actor called ``the singing cowboy'' is credited with the first cowboy song recording?
Gene Autry

What American singer and songwriter is known for albums like Highway 61 revisited (1965) and Blood on the tracks (1975) and won the Nobel Prize for Literature (2016)?
Bob Dylan

What American speed skater won five Olympic gold medals: in the 500-meter race in 1988, 1992, and 1994 and the 1,000-meter race in 1992 and 1994?
Bonnie Blair

What American water route allows sheltered boat passage for 3,100 km along the Atlantic between Boston and Key West?
Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway

What American writer of popular songs wrote ``Walk on by'' (1961), ``Alfie'' (1966), and ``Raindrops keep falling on my head'' (1969)?
Burt Bacharach

What vacation residence of the British royal family is located in the Dee River in Scotland?
Balmoral Castle

What variety of round-grained rice is used in the making of risotto?
Arborio

What Venezuelan patriot and statesman was called ``the liberator''?
Simón Bolívar

What venue is home to the Anaheim Ducks?
Honda Center

What venue is home to the Arizona Cardinals?
State Farm Stadium, Glendale

What venue is home to the Arizona Coyotes?
Gila River Arena, Glendale

What venue is home to the Arizona Diamondbacks?
Chase Field, Phoenix

What venue is home to the Atlanta Braves?
Truist Park

What venue is home to the Atlanta Falcons?
Mercedes-Benz Stadium

What venue is home to the Atlanta Hawks?
State Farm Arena

What venue is home to the Baltimore Orioles?
Camden Yards

What venue is home to the Baltimore Ravens?
M\&T Bank Stadium

What venue is home to the Boston Bruins and Celtics?
TD Garden

What venue is home to the Boston Red Sox?
Fenway Park

What venue is home to the Brooklyn Nets?
Barclays Center

What venue is home to the Buffalo Bills?
Bills Stadium

What venue is home to the Buffalo Sabres?
KeyBank Center

What venue is home to the Calgary Flames?
Scotiabank Saddledome

What venue is home to the Carolina Hurricanes?
PNC Arena, Raleigh

What venue is home to the Carolina Panthers?
Bank of America Stadium, Charlotte

What venue is home to the Charlotte Hornets?
Spectrum Center

What venue is home to the Chicago Bears?
Soldier Field

What venue is home to the Chicago Blackhawks and Bulls?
United Center

What venue is home to the Cincinnati Bengals?
Paul Brown Stadium

What venue is home to the Cincinnati Reds?
Great American Ball Park

What venue is home to the Cleveland Browns?
FirstEnergy Stadium

What venue is home to the Cleveland Cavaliers?
Rocket Mortgage FieldHouse

What venue is home to the Cleveland Indians?
Progressive Field

What venue is home to the Colorado Avalanche?
Pepsi Center

What venue is home to the Colorado Rockies?
Coors Field

What venue is home to the Columbus Blue Jackets?
Nationwide Arena

What venue is home to the Dallas Cowboys?
AT\&T Stadium

What venue is home to the Dallas Mavericks and Stars?
American Airlines Center

What venue is home to the Denver Broncos?
Empower Field at Mile High

What venue is home to the Denver Nuggets?
Pepsi Center

What venue is home to the Detroit Lions?
Ford Field

What venue is home to the Detroit Pistons and Red Wings?
Little Caesars Arena

What venue is home to the Detroit Tigers?
Comerica Park

What venue is home to the Edmonton Oilers?
Rogers Place

What venue is home to the Florida Panthers?
BB\T Center, Sunrise

What venue is home to the Golden State Warriors?
Chase Center, San Francisco

What venue is home to the Green Bay Packers?
Lambeau Field

What venue is home to the Houston Astros?
Minute Maid Park

What venue is home to the Houston Rockets?
Toyota Center

What venue is home to the Houston Texans?
NRG Stadium

What venue is home to the Indiana Pacers?
Bankers Life Fieldhouse, Indianapolis

What venue is home to the Indianapolis Colts?
Lucas Oil Stadium

What venue is home to the Jacksonville Jaguars?
TIAA Bank Field

What venue is home to the Kansas City Chiefs?
Arrowhead Stadium

What venue is home to the Kansas City Royals?
Kauffman Stadium

What venue is home to the Las Vegas Raiders?
Allegiant Stadium

What venue is home to the Los Angeles Angels?
Angel Stadium, Anaheim

What venue is home to the Los Angeles Chargers and Rams?
Sofi Stadium, Inglewood

What venue is home to the Los Angeles Clippers?
Staples Center

What venue is home to the Los Angeles Dodgers?
Dodger Stadium

What venue is home to the Los Angeles Kings and Lakers?
Staples Center

What venue is home to the Memphis Grizzlies?
FedExForum

What venue is home to the Miami Dolphins?
Hard Rock Stadium

What venue is home to the Miami Heat?
American Airlines Arena

What venue is home to the Miami Marlins?
Marlins Park

What venue is home to the Milwaukee Brewers?
American Family Field

What venue is home to the Milwaukee Bucks?
Fiserv Forum

What venue is home to the Minnesota Timberwolves?
Target Center

What venue is home to the Minnesota Twins?
Target Field

What venue is home to the Minnesota Vikings?
US Bank Stadium

What venue is home to the Minnesota Wild?
Xcel Energy Center

What venue is home to the Montreal Canadiens?
Bell Centre

What venue is home to the Nashville Predators?
Bridgestone Arena

What venue is home to the New England Patriots?
Gillette Stadium

What venue is home to the New Jersey Devils?
Prudential Center

What venue is home to the New Orleans Pelicans?
Smoothie King Center

What venue is home to the New Orleans Saints?
Mercedes-Benz Superdome

What venue is home to the New York Giants and Jets?
Metlife Stadium

What venue is home to the New York Islanders?
UBS Arena

What venue is home to the New York Knicks and Rangers?
Madison Square Garden

What venue is home to the New York Yankees?
Yankee Stadium

What venue is home to the Oakland Athletics?
Oakland Coliseum

What venue is home to the Oklahoma City Thunder?
Chesapeake Energy Arena

What venue is home to the Orlando Magic?
Amway Center

What venue is home to the Ottawa Senators?
Canadian Tire Centre

What venue is home to the Philadelphia 76ers and Flyers?
Wells Fargo Center

What venue is home to the Philadelphia Phillies?
Citizens Bank Park

What venue is home to the Philadephia Eagles?
Lincoln Financial Field

What venue is home to the Phoenix Suns?
Talking Stick Resort Arena

What venue is home to the Pittsburgh Penguins?
PPG Paints Arena

What venue is home to the Pittsburgh Pirates?
PNC Park

What venue is home to the Pittsburgh Steelers?
Heinz Field

What venue is home to the Portland Timbers?
Providence Park

What venue is home to the Portland Trail Blazers?
Moda Center

What venue is home to the Sacramento Kings?
Golden 1 Center

What venue is home to the San Antonio Spurs?
AT\&T Center

What venue is home to the San Diego Padres?
Petco Park

What venue is home to the San Francisco 49ers?
Levi's Stadium

What venue is home to the San Francisco Giants?
Oracle Park

What venue is home to the San Jose Sharks?
SAP Center

What venue is home to the Seattle Mariners?
T-Mobile Park

What venue is home to the Seattle Seahawks?
Lumen Field

What venue is home to the St. Louis Blues?
Enterprise Center

What venue is home to the St. Louis Cardinals?
Busch Stadium

What venue is home to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers?
Raymond James Stadium

What venue is home to the Tampa Bay Lightning?
Amalie Arena

What venue is home to the Tampa Bay Rays?
Tropicana Field

What venue is home to the Tenessee Titans?
Nissan Stadium, Nashville

What venue is home to the Texas Rangers?
Globe Life Field, Arlington

What venue is home to the Toronto Blue Jays?
Rogers Centre

What venue is home to the Toronto Maple Leafs and Raptors?
Scotiabank Arena

What venue is home to the Utah Jazz?
Vivint Smart Home Arena, Salt Lake City

What venue is home to the Vancouver Canucks?
Rogers Arena

What venue is home to the Vegas Golden Knights?
T-Mobile Arena

What venue is home to the Washington Capitals and Wizards?
Capital One Arena

What venue is home to the Washington Nationals?
Nationals Park

What venue is home to the Winnipeg Jets?
Bell MTS Place

What verb can mean ``pour juices or melted fat over meat during cooking to keep it moist'' or ``tack with long, loose stitches in preparation for sewing''?
baste

What verb means ``examine a patient by listening to sounds from (the heart, lungs, or other organs), typically using a stethoscope''?
auscultate

What verb means ``make (an unpleasant feeling) less intense''?
assuage

What verb means ``to argue about petty and trivial matters or to flow or fall with a gentle repetitive noise''?
bicker

What viruses are transmitted by mosquitoes, ticks, or other arthropods, like encephalitis, dengue, and yellow fever?
arboviruses

What viscountess (1879--1964) became the first woman to sit in the House of Commons when she succeeded her husband as a Parliamentarian in 1919?
Nancy Astor

What volume unit for timber is equal to 144 cubic inches, notionally twelve inches by twelve inches by one inch?
board foot

What was Banjul called before 1973?
Bathurst

What was Billie Holiday's birth name?
Eleanora Fagan

What was Brazil's first planned modern city?
Belo Horizonte

What was Ciudad Bolívar's former name?
Angostura

What was Harriet Tubman's birth name (no, it is not Moses)?
Araminta Ross

What was Henry IV's surname?
Bolingbroke

What was inscribed in Fermat's copy of Diophantus's Arithmetica, delineating Fermat's last ``theorem''?
Cubum autem in duos cubos, aut quadratoquadratum in duos quadratoquadratos \& generaliter nullam in infinitum ultra quadratum potestatem in duos eiusdem nominis fas est dividere cuius rei demonstrationem mirabilem sane detexi. Hanc marginis exiguitas non caperet.

What was Jakarta's former name?
Batavia

What was James Whitcomb Riley's pen name?
Benj. F. Johnson

What was Lesotho's name before 1966?
Basutoland

What was Louis Armstrong's nickname?
Satchmo

What was Mussolini's nickname?
Il Duce `The Leader'

What was the ancient Roman name for Ankara?
Ancyra

What was The Beatles' first (successful) single?
``Love Me Do''

What was the date of Black Monday?
19 October 1987

What was the date of Black Thursday?
24 October 1929

What was the date of Black Tuesday?
29 October 1929

What was the dogmatic constitution on divine revelation issued by the Second Vatican Council called?
Dei verbum

What was the former name for the capital of Turkmenistan, Ashgabat?
Poltoratsk

What was the former name for the Mediterranean coast of North Africa from Morocco to Egypt?
Barbary Coast

What was the smallest tribe of Israel?
Benjamin

What was the wife of Philemon in Greek mythology?
Baucis

What were the first names of the French industrialists that founded Michelin Tire Company in 1888?
André, Édouard

What westernmost Aleutian Island was occupied by Japanese forces?
Attu

What white crystalline compound used as an emetic and in the treatment of Parkinson's disease has the chemical formula C17H17NO2?
apomorphine

What white wine of German origin or style is made from selected bunches of grapes picked later than the general harvest?
Auslese

What white wine of German origin or style is made from selected individual grapes picked later than the general harvest?
Beerenauslese

What wind speed scale is based on a visual estimation of the wind's effects, ranging from force 0 (less than one knot or one mph, ``calm") to force 12 (64 knots or 74 mph and above, ``hurricane")?
Beaufort scale

What wine bottle has four times the capacity of an ordinary bottle?
jeroboam

What wine bottle has twice the capacity of a standard bottle?
magnum

What wine bottle is eight times the standard size?
methuselah

What wine bottle is twelve times the standard size?
salmanazar

What wine-producing region is located in the Dordogne valley of southwestern France?
Bergerac

What word can refer to each of a series of short cylindrical pieces inserted at intervals in decorative hollow mouldings or a rectangle placed vertically as a charge in heraldry?
billet

What word describes a classical building without columns or pilasters?
astylar

What word describes a fish migrating up a river to spawn?
anadromous

What word describes a fish or another organism inhabiting the deep sea where the environment is dark and cold, approximately 1,000--3,000 m below the surface?
bathypelagic

What word describes objects that have a physical property with a different value when measured in different directions, like wood, which is stronger along the grain than across it?
anisotropic

What word describing a crystal with no plane faces also signifies the downward inclination of an aircraft's wing?
anhedral

What word for a temporary camp without tents or cover that soldiers or mountaineers use comes from the Swiss-German for ``additional guard at night''?
bivouac

What word in Poland and Russia refers to an old woman or grandmother, but in North America refers to a headscarf tied under the chin, typical of those worn by Polish and Russian women?
babushka

What word is formally an affirmation or allegation but in law is a formal statement by a party in a case of a fact or circumstance which the party offers to prove or substantiate?
averment

What word is given to a circle of light or brightness surrounding something, especially as depicted in art around the head or body of a person represented as holy?
aureole

What word is given to a stressed syllable or part of a metrical foot in Greek or Latin verse?
arsis

What word is used for a person's name that is regarded as amusingly appropriate to their occupation?
aptronym/aptonym

What word is used for biblical or related writings that do not form part of the accepted canon of Scripture?
Apocrypha

What word meaning an ambitious or ruthlessly self-seeking person, especially one who has recently acquired wealth or social status, comes from early 20th century French?
arriviste

What word means something or someone that one vehemently dislikes but is also a formal curse by a pope or Church council excommunicating someone or denouncing a doctrine?
anathema

What word refers to a reflecting or refracting surface free from spherical aberration?
aplanat

What word refers to the displacement of the spectrum to shorter wavelengths in the light coming from distant celestial objects moving toward the observer?
blueshift

What word relates to or denotes multicellular glands that release some of their cytoplasm in their secretions?
apocrine

What word, from the Arabic for ``dwellers in the desert,'' describes a nomadic Arab of the desert?
Bedouin

What word, which likely originated from Dutch, means ``dress up or decorate gaudily''?
bedizen

What X-ray examination of the blood or lymph vessels is carried out after introducing a radiopaque substance?
angiography

What zoogeographical area comprises the Palearctic, Nearctic, Ethiopian, and Oriental regions?
Arctogaea

When did Neil Armstrong set foot on the moon?
20 July 1969

When is St. Augustine of Canterbury's feast day?
26 May

When is St. Augustine of Hippo's feast day?
28 August

When is St. Thomas Aquinas's feast day?
28 January

When something is extremely rare, one may say that it is as rare as hen's what?
teeth

When was the Armistice?
11 November 1918

When were the Articles of Confederation (the original constitution) ratified?
1781

Where are the Apostle Islands?
Lake Superior, Wisconsin

Where can you find the Narikala Fortress, Kartlis Deda, and the Sameba cathedral?
Tbilisi

Where did God exile Cain after Cain murdered Abel?
Land of Nod (Gen. 4.16)

Where did Gropius establish Bauhaus?
Weimar

Where is Arecibo: an observatory noted for its enormous radio telescope that collapsed in Dec. 2020?
Puerto Rico

Where is Assisi located?
Umbria

Where is Disneyland?
Anaheim

Where is the Al Saleh Mosque and Bab al-Yaman?
Sanaa

Where is the Asian Development Bank headquartered?
Manila

Where is the Associated Press based?
New York City

Where is the Golden Temple?
Amritsar, India

Where is the Rose Bowl?
Pasadena, California

Where is the Stade de France, France's largest stadium?
Saint-Denis

Where is the University of Michigan?
Ann Arbor

Where was Arthur conveyed after death?
Avalon

Where was Hans Asperger born?
Vienna

Where was Osama bin Laden born?
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Where was Osama bin Laden killed?
Abbottabad, Pakistan

Who coined the word ``bathyscaphe''?
Auguste Piccard

Who commissioned St. Basil's Cathedral to commemorate his capture of Kazan from the Tartars in 1552?
Ivan the Terrible

Who commissioned the Arc de Triomphe to commemorate his victories?
Napoleon

Who composed the music for ``Rule, Britannia!''?
Thomas Arne

Who convoked the Council of Trent?
Paul III

Who derived the principle that the pressure of a fluid at rest is transmitted equally in all directions?
Blaise Pascal

Who designed the Statue of Liberty?
Auguste Bartholdi

Who elevated St. Bonaventure to the status of Doctor of the Church with the bull Triumphantis Hierusalem?
Sixtus V

Who founded the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters in 1928?
Asa Philip Randolph

Who introduced the current sense of the word ``bathos,'' which means ``an effect of anticlimax created by an unintentional lapse in mood from the sublime to the trivial or ridiculous''?
Alexander Pope

Who invented the laser?
Arthur Leonard Schawlow, Charles H. Townes

Who is the Greek god of war, son of Zeus and Hera?
Ares

Who is the leader of the Church of England?
Archbishop of Canterbury

Who is the only English-born Doctor of the Church?
St. Bede the Venerable

Who penned Orlando Furioso?
Ludovico Ariosto

Who called the Metamorphoses of Apuleius ``Asinus aureus''?
Augustine of Hippo

Who served as commander of the British forces against Napoleon (1808--14) and defeated him at Waterloo (1815), ending the Napoleonic Wars?
Arthur Wellesley (1st Duke of Wellington)

Who was Aeneas's father?
Anchises

Who was the Bückeburg Bach?
J. C. F. Bach

Who was the Halle Bach?
W. F. Bach

Who was the London Bach?
J. C. Bach

Who was Muhammad's wife?
Ayesha

Who was nicknamed ``the Angelic Doctor''?
St. Thomas Aquinas

Who was Nigeria's first president?
Nnamdi Azikiwe

Who was the first black male tennis player to achieve world rankings?
Arthur Ashe

Who was the first of the notable mathematician-astronomers from the classical age of Indian mathematics and Indian astronomy?
Aryabhata I

Who were the two most recent popes to have resigned?
Benedict XVI, Gregory XII

Who wrote the screenplay for 2001: a space odyssey?
Sir Arthur C. Clarke, Stanley Kubrick

William Morris was the most prominent member of what movement?
Arts and Crafts Movement

What Equatorial Guinean island's former names include Fernando Póo and Macias Nguema?
Bioko

With the First Vatican Council, Pius IX defined what concept in an apostolic constitution called ``Pastor aeternus''?
papal infallibility

(10 BC--54 AD) What Roman emperor (41--54) restored order after Caligula's decadence and expanded the empire, in particular by invading Britain in 43?
Claudius

(106--43 BC) What Roman statesman, orator, and writer established a model for Latin prose, with his surviving works including speeches, treatises on rhetoric, philosophical works, and letters, and was a supporter of Pompey against Julius Caesar, having attacked Mark Antony in the Philippics (43 BC), who had him put to death?
Cicero

(188--217) What Roman emperor, later called ``Marcus Aurelius Severus Antoninus Augustus,'' granted Roman citizenship to all free inhabitants of the Roman Empire in 212?
Caracalla

(234--149 BC) What Roman statesman, orator, and writer initiated a vigorous reform program and attempted to stem the growing influence of Greek culture as censor?
Marcus Porcius Cato

(465--511) What king of the Franks (481--511) extended Merovingian rule to Gaul and Germany, making Paris his capital, and championed orthodoxy against the Arian Visigoths, finally defeating them in the battle of Poitiers (507) after his conversion to Christianity?
Clovis

(680--754) What Anglo-Saxon missionary known as the Apostle of Germany was sent to Frisia and Germany to spread the Christian faith, appointed primate of Germany in 732, and martyred in Frisia?
St. Boniface

(680--754) What Anglo-Saxon missionary known as the Apostle of Germany was sent to Frisia and Germany to spread the Christian faith, appointed primate of Germany in 732, and martyred in Frisia?
St. Boniface

(1194--1253, feast day: 11 August) What Italian saint and abbess co-founded the order of Poor Ladies of San Damiano?
St. Clare of Assisi

(1221--74, feast day: 15 July) What Franciscan theologian, known as ``the Seraphic Doctor,'' wrote the official biography of St. Francis?
St. Bonaventura

(1221--74) What Franciscan theologian, known as the Seraphic Doctor and whose feast is on 15 July, wrote the official biography of St. Francis?
St. Bonaventura

(1389--1464) What Italian statesman and banker laid the foundations for his family's power in Florence, becoming the city's ruler in 1434 and using his considerable wealth to promote the arts and learning?
Cosimo de' Medici

(1444--1514) What Italian architect drew up the first plan for St. Peter's Cathedral, which began in 1506, and established the concept of a huge central dome?
Donato Bramante

(1480--1519) What Italian noblewoman was the illegitimate daughter of Pope Alexander VI and sister of Cesare?
Lucrezia Borgia

(1485--1547) What first Spanish conquistador overthrew the Aztec empire by conquering its capital, Tenochtitlán, in 1519 and by deposing its emperor, Montezuma, and annihilated Tenochtitlán in 1521, established Mexico City as the capital of New Spain, and served briefly as its governor?
Hernando Cortés

(1488--1568) What English biblical scholar translated the first complete printed English Bible in 1535?
Miles Coverdale

(1491--1557) What French explorer was the first to establish France's claim to North America, making three voyages to Canada between 1534 and 1541?
Jacques Cartier

(1509--64) On becoming a Protestant, this theologian and reformer fled to Switzerland, where he attempted to reorder society on reformed Christian principles. Identify this Frenchman whose Institutes of the Christian Religion (1536) was the first systematic account of reformed Christian doctrine.
John Calvin

(1546--1601) What Danish astronomer built an observatory equipped with precision instruments and, despite demonstrating that comets follow sun-centred paths, adhered to a geocentric system of planetary motions?
Tycho Brahe

(1548--1600) What Italian philosopher supported the heliocentric Copernican view of the solar system, envisaged an infinite universe of numerous worlds moving in space, and thus was tried by the Inquisition for heresy and burned at the stake?
Giordano Bruno

(1550--1605) This Russian was tsar from 1598 to 1605. Identify this namesake of an opera whose reign was marked by famine, doubts over his involvement in the earlier death of Ivan the Terrible's eldest son, and the appearance of pretender False Dmitri.
Boris Godunov

(1564--93) What English poet and playwright wrote works including The Jew of Malta, Doctor Faustus, Edward the Second, and The massacre at Paris?
Christopher Marlowe

(1567--1635) What French explorer and colonial statesman established a settlement at Quebec in 1608, developed alliances with the indigenous peoples, and was appointed lieutenant governor in 1612?
Samuel de Champlain

(1585--1638) What Flemish theologian and Roman Catholic strongly opposed the Jesuits and proposed reform of Christianity through a return to the teachings of St. Augustine, founding a movement that bears his name?
Cornelius Otto Jansen

(1593--c. 1661) What English-born Dutch portrait painter painted for the court of Charles I and, after the outbreak of the English Civil War, emigrated to Holland (1643)?
Cornelius Johnson

(1599--1667) This Italian architect was a ``keen student of the architecture of Michelangelo and the ruins of Antiquity.'' Identify this leading figure of the Italian baroque style whose most notable works include the Re Magi Chapel of the Propaganda Fide, Sant'Agnese in Agone, Sant'Ivo alla Sapienza, the Oratory of Saint Philip Neri, and San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane.
Francesco Borromini

(1600--82) What French painter is noted for the use of light in his landscapes, his works including Ascanius and the stag (1682)?
Claude Lorrain

(1606--84) What French playwright, regarded as the founder of classical French tragedy, composed Le Cid (1637), Cinna (1641), and Polyeucte (1643)?
Pierre Corneille

(1612--80) What English poet is most notable for his three-part satirical poem Hudibras (1663--78)?
Samuel Butler

(1625--1712) What Italian-born French astronomer discovered the gap in the rings of Saturn, which are named after him?
Giovanni Domenico Cassini

(1628--88) What English writer's major work, The pilgrim's progress (1678--84), is an allegory recounting the spiritual journey of its hero Pilgrim?
John Bunyan

(1628--1703) What French writer is noted for Mother goose tales (1697)?
Charles Perrault

(1643--87) What French explorer sailed from Canada down the Ohio and Mississippi rivers to the Gulf of Mexico in 1682, naming the Mississippi basin Louisiana in honour of Louis XIV and, in 1684, led an expedition to establish a French colony on the Gulf of Mexico, but was murdered when his followers mutinied?
René-Robert Cavelier La Salle

(1670--1729) What English playwright's plays, such as Love for love (1695) and The way of the world (1700), epitomize the wit and satire of Restoration comedy?
William Congreve

(1682--1718) What king of Sweden (1697--1718) initiated the Great Northern War against Denmark, Poland-Saxony, and Russia in 1700 and embarked on an expedition into Russia in 1709, which ended in the destruction of his army and his internment?
Charles XII

(1695--1755) What British soldier was commander in chief of the British forces in America and died in action in western Pennsylvania?
Edward Braddock

(1703--70) What French painter, decorative artist, and leading figure of the rococo style in France is known for works like The rising of the sun (1753) and Summer pastoral (1749)?
François Boucher

(1707--78) What Swedish botanist and founder of modern systematic botany and zoology devised an authoritative classification system for flowering plants involving binomial Latin names (later superseded by that of Antoine Jussieu) and a classification method for animals?
Carolus Linnaeus

(1707--88) What French naturalist and founder of paleontology emphasized the unity of all living species, minimizing the apparent differences between animals and plants, and wrote a compilation of the animal kingdom, the Histoire Naturelle, which reached thirty-six volumes by the time of his death?
Comte de Buffon

(1713--84) What French philosopher, writer, critic, and leading figure of the French Enlightenment was principal editor of the Encyclopédie (1751--76) and composed works such as Le Rêve de D'Alembert (1782) and Le Neveu de Rameau (1805)?
Denis Diderot

(1714--87) What German composer initiated a new style in which he united dramatic, musical, and emotional elements with Orfeo ed Euridice (1762), revolutionizing opera, and composed Alceste (1767), Iphigénie en Aulide (1774), and Iphigénie en Tauride (1779)?
Christoph Willibald Gluck

(1716--83) What English landscape gardener evolved an English style of natural-looking landscape parks and has work enduring at Belvoir Castle, Croome Court, Blenheim Palace, Warwick Castle, Harewood House, Highclere Castle, Appuldurcombe House, and Milton Abbey?
Lancelot Capability Brown

(1718--79) What English furniture maker and designer produced furniture in a neoclassical vein, with elements of the French rococo, chinoiserie, and Gothic revival styles?
Thomas Chippendale

(1729--1811) What French explorer led the first French circumnavigation of the globe from 1766 to 1769, visiting many of the islands of the South Pacific and compiling an invaluable scientific record of his findings?
Louis Antoine de Bougainville

(1740--95) What Scottish author and companion and biographer of Samuel Johnson wrote Journal of a tour to the Hebrides (1785) and The life of Samuel Johnson (1791)?
James Boswell

(1743--1823) What English engineer invented the power loom?
Edmund Cartwright

(1754--1838) What French statesman became head of the new government after the fall of Napoleon in 1814 and was later instrumental in the overthrow of Charles X and the accession of Louis Philippe in 1830?
Charles de Talleyrand

(1759--96) What Scottish poet is noted for poems such as ``The jolly beggars'' (1786) and ``Tam o' shanter'' (1791), and for old Scottish songs that he collected, including ``Auld Lang Syne''?
Robert Burns

(1760--1825) What French social reformer and philosopher argued that society should be organized by leaders of industry and given spiritual direction by scientists?
Comte de Saint-Simon

(1768--93) What French political assassin assassinated revolutionary leader Jean-Paul Marat in his bath in 1793 and was later found guilty of treason and guillotined four days later?
Charlotte Corday

(1768--1848) What French writer and diplomat is noted for Le Génie du Christianisme (1802) and Mémoires d'outre-tombe (autobiography, 1849--50)?
François-René Chateaubriand

(1770--1838) What American explorer commanded an expedition from 1804 to 1806 across the North American continent with Meriwether Lewis?
William Clark

(1772--1834) What English poet, critic, and philosopher marked the start of English romanticism in his Lyrical ballads (1798), written with William Wordsworth, which included ``The rime of the ancient mariner,'' and also wrote ``Christabel'' and ``Kubla Khan'' (1816)?
Samuel Taylor Coleridge

(1775--1834) What English essayist and critic authored Essays of Elia (1823) and wrote Tales from Shakespeare (1807) with his sister Mary (1764--1847)?
Charles Lamb

(1777--1852) What American politician, statesman, and orator (secretary of state 1825--29), nicknamed ``the Great Pacificator'' and ``the Great Compromiser,'' was a leader of the anti-British ``War Hawks'' in 1811 and championed the Missouri Compromise 1820?
Henry Clay

(1778--1840) What English dandy was the arbiter of British fashion for the early nineteenth century, owing his social position to his friendship with the Prince Regent?
George Bryan Brummell

(1779--1863) What American writer is best known for his poem ``A visit from St. Nicholas'' (1822), which was published anonymously?
Clement Moore

(1780--1831) What Prussian general and military theorist wrote On war (1833), which had a marked influence on strategic studies in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries?
Karl von Clausewitz

(1786--1826) What German composer is regarded as the founder of the German romantic school of opera and wrote Der Freischütz (1817--21) and Euryanthe (1822--23)?
Carl Maria von Weber

(1787--1848) What Irish genealogical and heraldic writer compiled the first edition of a Peerage in 1826, still regarded as the authoritative guide to the British aristocracy?
John Burke

(1795--1881) What Scottish historian and political philosopher wrote History of the French Revolution (1837)?
Thomas Carlyle

(1796--1832) What French scientist's work in analyzing the efficiency of steam engines was crucial to the theory of thermodynamics?
Nicolas Léonard Sadi Carnot

(1797--1858) What Swedish chemist discovered the elements lanthanum, erbium, and terbium, and the supposed element didymium?
Carl Gustaf Mosander

(1805--70) What English engineer and railroad contractor built more than 10,000 kilometres of railroads in Europe, India, South America, and Australia?
Thomas Brassey

(1806--61) What English poet who eloped with Robert in 1846 established her reputation with Poems (1844) and wrote other works like Sonnets from the Portuguese (1850), Aurora Leigh (novel, 1857), and the posthumous Last poems (1862)?
Elizabeth Barrett Browning

(1806--59) What English engineer, son of French-born engineer Sir Marc, designed the Great Western (1838), the first transatlantic steamship, and the Great Eastern (1858), the world's largest ship until 1899?
Isambard Kingdom Brunel

(1811--99) What German chemist pioneered spectroscopy with Kirchhoff, detecting new elements (cesium and rubidium) and determining the composition of many substances and of the sun and stars, and designed chemical apparatuses including his namesake burner (1855)?
Robert Bunsen

(1812--89) What English poet who eloped with Elizabeth Barrett in 1846 established his name with Dramatic lyrics that contained ``The pied piper of Hamelin'' and ``My last duchess'' and wrote other works like Dramatic romances and lyrics (1845), Men and women (1855), and The ring and the book (1868--69)?
Robert Browning

(1817--78) What French landscape painter and member of the Barbizon School is often regarded as a linking figure between this group and the impressionists?
Charles François Daubigny

(1818--93) What French composer, conductor, and organist is best known for his opera Faust (1859)?
Charles François Gounod

(1819--77) What French painter and leader of the nineteenth-century realist school of painting's works include Burial at Ornans (1850) and Painter in his studio (1855)?
Gustave Courbet

(1821--90) This explorer, anthropologist, and translator, along with John Hanning Speke, was the first European to see Lake Tanganyika. Identify this Englishman who translated Arabian nights (1885--88), Kama Sutra (1883), and The perfumed garden (1886)?
Sir Richard Burton

(1821--93) What English painter was inspired by the Pre-Raphaelites, and in 1861 he became a founding member of William Morris's company, designing stained glass and furniture?
Ford Madox Brown

(1822--90) What Belgian-born French composer and organist wrote Symphonic variations for piano and orchestra (1885), the D minor Symphony (1886--88), and the String Quartet (1889)?
César Franck

(1825--93) What French neurologist and founder of modern neurology's work on hysteria was adopted by his student Sigmund Freud?
Jean-Martin Charcot

(1825--95) What English couturier, resident in France from 1845, is regarded as the founder of Parisian haute couture and noted for designing gowns with crinolines and introducing the bustle?
Charles Frederick Worth

(1826--1910) What Italian chemist revived Avogadro's law and used it to distinguish clearly between atoms and molecules and to introduce the unified system of atomic and molecular weights?
Stanislao Cannizzaro

(1828--98) What German botanist and founder of bacteriology was the first to devise a systematic classification of bacteria into genera and species?
Ferdinand Cohn

(1829--1912) What English religious leader founded the Salvation Army and was its first general?
William Booth

(1830--1903) What French painter and graphic artist was a leading figure of the impressionist movement, typically painting landscapes and cityscapes and experimenting with pointillism in the 1880s?
Camille Pissarro

(1832--98) What English writer wrote the children's classics Alice's adventures in wonderland (1865) and Through the looking glass (1871), which were inspired by Alice Liddell, the young daughter of the dean at the Oxford college where he was a mathematics lecturer?
Lewis Carroll

(1832--1910) What French-born American aviation pioneer produced a number of gliders, including a biplane which made over seven hundred flights, and assisted the Wright brothers in making the world's first controlled powered flight?
Octave Chanute

(1833-98) What English painter and designer is noted for painting The mirror of Venus (1873--1877) and The golden stairs (1880)?
Sir Edward Burne-Jones

(1836--1911) What American publisher and manufacturer's board game ``The Checkered Game of Life'' (1860) led to the formation of a company in his name in 1864?
Milton Bradley

(1837--1921) What American naturalist and author entertained friends such as John Muir, Theodore Roosevelt, and Walt Whitman at his home near the Hudson River at West Park, New York, and wrote works including Wake-robin (1871), Locusts and wild honey (1879), and The summit of the years (1913)?
John Burroughs

(1839--1906) What French painter is closely identified with post-impressionism, and his later work had an important influence on cubism, having painted The hanged man's house (1873), Still life with Cupid (1895) and Bathers (sequence of paintings, 1890--1905)?
Paul Cézanne

(1839--1914) What American philosopher, logician, and founder of pragmatism argued that the meaning of a belief is to be understood by the actions and uses to which it gives rise?
Charles Sanders Peirce

(1841--1929) What French statesman (prime minister 1906-09, 1917--20) pushed hard for a punitive settlement with Germany at the Versailles peace talks but failed to obtain all that he demanded?
Georges Clemenceau

(1843--1926) What Italian histologist and anatomist devised a staining technique to investigate nerve tissue, classified types of nerve cells, described the structure in the cytoplasm of most cells now named after him, and won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1906) with Santiago Ramón y Cajal?
Camillo Golgi

(1844--1926) What American painter, known for her draftsmanship, etching, and dry-point studies, was persuaded by Edgar Degas to exhibit with the impressionists, worked mostly in Paris, and painted works, including Lady at the tea table (1885), that display a close interest in everyday subject matter?
Mary Cassatt

(1844--1930) What English poet and literary critic, who was poet laureate from 1913 to 1930, wrote a long philosophical poem, The testament of beauty (1929), in the Victorian tradition?
Robert Bridges

(1845--1918) What Russian-born German mathematician's work on numbers laid the foundations for the theory of sets and stimulated twentieth-century exploration of number theory?
Georg Cantor

(1846--86) After what English graphic artist and watercolour painter, noted for his illustrations for children's books, is an annually-awarded medal for the illustration of American children's books named?
Randolph Caldecott

(1847--1912) What Irish novelist and theatre manager is chiefly remembered as the author of the vampire story Dracula (1897)?
Bram Stoker

(1849--1924) What British-born American novelist is remembered chiefly for her novels for children, including Little Lord Fauntleroy (1886), A little princess (1905), and The secret garden (1911)?
Frances Hodgson Burnett

(1849--1926) What American horticulturist's experiments in cross-breeding led to new types and improved varieties of plants, especially the Shasta daisy and the potato?
Luther Burbank

(1850--1917) What Italian-born American religious leader founded the Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart in 1880, was responsible for the establishment of many schools, hospitals, and orphanages in the United States and South America, and became the first American saint in 1946?
St. Frances Xavier Cabrini

(1850--1918) What German physicist who shared the Nobel Prize in 1909 with Marconi invented the coupled system of radio transmission and a forerunner of the cathode ray tube in which a beam of electrons could be deflected?
Karl Ferdinand Braun

(1854--1937) What Canadian Conservative statesman was prime minister (1911--20)?
Robert Laird Borden

(1857--1952) What English physiologist contributed greatly to the understanding of the nervous system and introduced the concept of reflexactions and the reflex arc, having won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1932)?
Sir Charles Scott Sherrington

(1858--1930) What Dutch physician's work resulted in a simple cure for beriberi and led to the discovery of the vitamin thiamine, winning the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1929) with Frederick G. Hopkins?
Christiaan Eijkman

(1859--1930) What Scottish novelist and short-story writer is known for his creation of private detective Sherlock Holmes, who first appeared in A study in scarlet (1887), and wrote The hound of the Baskervilles (1902)?
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle

(1860--1917) What German organic chemist studied the chemistry of alcoholic fermentation and identified several enzymes, notably zymase, and won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry (1907)?
Eduard Buchner

(1862--1942) What English physicist and founder of solid-state physics collaborated with his son, Sir (William) Lawrence (1890--1971), in developing X-ray diffraction for determining the atomic structure of crystals and shared the Nobel Prize for Physics with his son in 1915?
Sir William Henry Bragg

(1865--1931) What Danish composer is best known for his six symphonies?
Carl August Nielsen

(1870--1953) What Russian poet, writer, and opponent of modernism concentrated on the themes of peasant life and love and won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1933?
Ivan Bunin

(1870--1961) Belgian bacteriologist and immunologist discovered the complement system of blood serum and developed a vaccine for whooping cough?
Jules Bordet

(1873--1921) What Italian opera singer was the first major tenor whose work was recorded and released on records?
Enrico Caruso

(1874--1936) What English essayist, novelist, and critic's novels include The Napoleon of Notting Hill (1904) and a series of detective stories featuring Father Brown, a priest with a talent for crime detection?
G. K. Chesterton

(1874--1939) What English archaeologist discovered the tomb of Tutankhamen in 1922 while excavating in the Valley of the Kings at Thebes?
Howard Carter

(1874--1954) What American composer, noted for his use of polyrhythms, polytonality, quarter-tones, and aleatoric techniques, wrote works like The unanswered question (1906), Three places in New England (1903--14), and Concord (1915)?
Charles Ives

(1875--1946) What Soviet statesman was head of state (1919--46) and founded the newspaper Pravda (1912)?
Mikhail Ivanovich Kalinin

(1875--1950) What American novelist and science fiction writer was most successful with an adventure series that began with Tarzan of the apes (1914)?
Edgar Rice Burroughs

(1876--1957) What Romanian-born French sculptor's sculpture represents an attempt to move away from representational art and capture the essence of forms by reducing them to their ultimate, almost abstract, simplicity?
Constantin Brancusi

(1878--1965) What Austrian-born Israeli religious philosopher's existentialist work I and thou (1923) argues that religious experience involves reciprocal relationships with a personal subject, rather than knowledge of some ``thing''?
Martin Buber

(1878--1967) This poet and biographer's poetry is collected in Chicago poems (1915), Smoke and steel (1920), Complete poems (1950), and Honey and salt (1963). Identify this American also noted for his biography of Abraham Lincoln, written in six volumes (Abraham Lincoln: The prairie years, two volumes, and Abraham Lincoln: The war years, four volumes) between 1926 and 1939.
Carl Sandburg

(1882--1963) What French painter's collages, which introduced commercial lettering and fragmented objects into pictures to contrast the real with the ``illusory'' painted image, were the first stage in developing synthetic cubism?
Georges Braque

(1884--1942) What Polish anthropologist initiated the technique of participant observation and developed the functionalist approach to anthropology?
Bronisław Malinowski

(1884--1967) What Polish-born American biochemist showed that a number of diseases, including scurvy, rickets, beriberi, and pellagra, were caused by the deficiency of a particular dietary component and coined the term ``vitamins'' for the chemicals concerned?
Casimir Funk

(1887--1985) What Russian-born French painter and graphic artist's work was characterized by the use of rich emotive colour and dream imagery and had a significant influence on surrealism?
Marc Chagall

(1888--1970) What Indian physicist discovered an effect whereby the wavelength of light changes when a light beam is deflected by molecules (named after him), one of the most significant proofs of the quantum theory of light, and won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1930?
Sir C. V. Raman

(1889--1963) What French playwright, novelist, and movie director's works include Beauty and the beast (1945) and Orpheus (1949)?
Jean Cocteau

(1890--1938) What Czech novelist and playwright is known for R. U. R. (Rossum's universal robots) (1920), which introduced the word ``robot'' to the English language, and The insect play (1921), written with his brother Josef (1887--1945)?
Karel Čapek

(1890--1960) What Russian poet, novelist, and translator is best known for Doctor Zhivago, a story that describes the experience of the Russian intelligentsia during the Russian Revolution that was banned in the former Soviet Union, and had to turn down the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1958?
Boris Pasternak

(1891--1970) What German-born American philosopher and founding member of the Vienna Circle wrote The logical structure of the world (1928) and The logical foundations of probability (1950)?
Rudolf Carnap

(1893--1943) What Lithuanian-born French painter and major exponent of expressionism's early pictures were of grotesque figures, while his later pictures tended to be still lifes?
Chaim Soutine

(1894--1974) What Indian physicist frequently collaborated with Einstein and was a key component in developing quantum and statistical mechanics?
Satyendra Nath Bose

(1897--1945) What German Nazi leader and politician was Hitler's minister of propaganda?
Joseph Goebbels

(1898--1956) This playwright, producer, and poet's interest in combining music and drama led to collaboration with Kurt Weill in The threepenny opera (1928). Identify this German whose later dramas include Mother courage (1941) and The Caucasian chalk circle (1948).
Bertolt Brecht

(1898--1976) What American sculptor and painter, one of the first artists to introduce movement into sculpture, made mobiles incorporating abstract forms and static sculptures called ``stabiles''?
Alexander Calder

(1899--1966) What English novelist is remembered for his seafaring novels set during the Napoleonic Wars and featuring Captain Horatio Hornblower and also for The African queen (1935)?
C. S. Forester

(1899--1973) What British novelist and short-story writer wrote works including The death of the heart (1938) and The heat of the day (1949)?
Elizabeth Bowen

(1899--1973) What English playwright, actor, and composer is remembered for witty, satirical plays, such as Hay fever (1925) and Private lives (1930), as well as for revues and musicals featuring songs such as ``Mad dogs and Englishmen'' (1932)?
Sir Noël Coward

(1899--1981) What American jazz pianist, composer, and singer's best-known songs include ``Stardust'' (1929), ``Georgia on my mind'' (1930), and ``In the cool, cool, cool of the evening'' (1951)?
Hoagy Carmichael

(1899--1986) What Argentine poet, short-story writer, and essayist wrote a seminal work of magic realism: A universal history of infamy (1935)?
Jorge Luis Borges

(1900--83) What Spanish movie director wrote and directed his first movie Un Chien andalou (1929) jointly with Salvador Dalí and directed other films like Belle de jour (1967) and The discreet charm of the bourgeoisie (1972)?
Luis Buñuel

(1901--72) What English yachtsman was the first person to sail alone around the world with only one stop (1966--67) in his yacht Gipsy Moth IV?
Sir Francis Chichester

(1902--81) What Hungarian-born American architect designed the UNESCO headquarters in Paris (1953--58) and the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York City (1963--66) and is also known for his chair designs?
Marcel Lajos Breuer

(1902--87) What American physicist and inventor invented the point-contact transistor with Bardeen and Shockley, for which the three shared the Nobel Prize in 1956?
Walter Houser Brattain

(1903-90) What Austrian-born American psychologist's experiences in Nazi Germany helped him develop revolutionary theories and therapies for autistic children based on Freudian psychoanalysis?
Bruno Bettelheim

(1903--2000) What Tunisian nationalist and statesman was the first president of independent Tunisia (1957--87)?
Habib ibn Ali Bourguiba

(1904--90) What Soviet physicist investigated the effects of high-energy particles, discovered the cause of blue light emitted by radioactive substances underwater, and shared the 1958 Nobel Prize for Physics with Ilja Mikhailovich Frank and Igor Yevgenyevich Tamm?
Pavel Cherenkov

(1904--90) What American behaviourist psychologist promoted the view that the proper aim of psychology should be to predict behaviour and hence be able to control it and applied the results of his studies to the development of programmed learning and educational practice?
Burrhus Frederic Skinner

(1906--45) This German Lutheran theologian was an active opponent of Nazism and was involved in the German resistance. Identify this pastor arrested in 1943, sent to Buchenwald concentration camp, and later executed.
Dietrich Bonhoeffer

(1906--45) This German Lutheran theologian was an active opponent of Nazism and was involved in the German resistance. Identify this pastor arrested in 1943, sent to Buchenwald concentration camp, and later executed.
Dietrich Bonhoeffer

(1906--79) What German-born British biochemist isolated and purified penicillin with Howard Florey, sharing the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1945) with Florey and Alexander Fleming?
Sir Ernst Boris Chain

(1906--82) What Soviet statesman's administration was marked by intensified persecution of dissidents at home and by attempted detente followed by renewed Cold War in 1968 and was largely responsible for the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968?
Leonid Brezhnev

(1906--94) What American teacher, critic, and leading proponent of the New Criticism movement edited The Southern Review from 1935 to 1942, taught at Yale University from 1947 to 1975, and wrote works including Modern poetry and tradition (1939) and The well-wrought urn (1947)?
Cleanth Brooks

(1907--94) What American jazz singer and bandleader was known for his style of scat singing and his flamboyant appearance, is associated with songs such as ``Minnie the moocher'' (1931) and ``Jumpin' jive'' (1939), and led a succession of outstanding big bands from 1928 to 1953?
Cab Calloway

(1908--2009) What French social anthropologist regarded language as an essential common denominator underlying cultural phenomena?
Claude Lévi-Strauss

(1908--2012) What American composer was noted for his innovative approach to meter and his choice of sources as diverse as modern jazz and Renaissance madrigals?
Elliott Carter

(1909--90) What American architect is best known for his use of the International style in corporate architecture, having designed the Lever House in 1952 in New York City and the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in 1974 in Washington, DC?
Gordon Bunshaft

(1909--2000) What Danish-born American pianist was noted for his clowning while playing classical music and his one-man show, Comedy in Music, which began an eight hundred and forty-nine-performance run on Broadway in 1953?
Victor Borge

(1910--95) What Indian-born American astronomer suggested that some stars could eventually collapse to form a dense white dwarf, provided that their mass does not exceed an upper limit (named after him)?
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar

(1910--97) What French oceanographer and documentary movie director devised the scuba apparatus but is known primarily for several documentaries and television series on marine life?
Jacques Cousteau

(1910--99) What American writer and composer studied music in Paris and worked as a music critic and composer in the 1930s and later wrote novels, like The sheltering sky (1949), Let it come down (1952), and The spider's house (1966), that typically concerned Westerners in the Arab world?
Paul Bowles

(1911--97) What American biochemist who won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1961 investigated photosynthesis and discovered the cycle of reactions that constitutes the dark reaction?
Melvin Calvin

(1912--77) What German-born American rocket engineer led the development of the V-2 rockets used by Germany in World War II and subsequently moved to the United States where he worked in the Unites States space program?
Wernher von Braun

(1912--92) What American composer, pianist, and writer was noted for his experimental approach, which included the use of aleatory music, periods of silence, and various musical instruments?
John Cage

(1913--76) What English composer, pianist, and conductor composed operas such as Peter Grimes (1945), A midsummer night's dream (1960), and Death in Venice (1973)?
Benjamin Britten

(1913-92) What German statesman and Chancellor of West Germany (1969--74) achieved international recognition for his policy of detente and the opening of relations with the Eastern bloc countries (Ostpolitik) and won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1971?
Willy Brandt

(1914--2009) What American agronomist worked for many years on the improvement of wheat crops and the adaptation of new strains of wheat to parts of the world where it had not previously been grown, winning the Nobel Peace Prize for his work in 1970?
Norman Borlaug

(1916--2001) What American engineer and pioneer of mathematical communication theory investigated digital circuits and was the first to use the term ``bit'' to describe a unit of information?
Claude Elwood Shannon

(1917--2000) What American poet and writer was the first African American woman named as poetry consultant to the Library of Congress (1985--86) and the first to be awarded a Pulitzer Prize for her poetry collected in Annie Allen (1949)?
Gwendolyn Brooks

(1917--2013) What British-born Belgian biochemist was a pioneer in the study of cell biology, winning won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1974 with Albert Claude (1899--1983) and George Palade (1912--2008)?
Christian René de Duve

(1918--89) What Romanian communist statesman, the first president of the Socialist Republic of Romania (1974--89) and whose regime became increasingly totalitarian and corrupt, was subject to a popular uprising in December 1989 resulted in his regime's downfall and his execution?
Nicolae Ceauşescu

(1920--2006) What American physicist investigated subatomic particles and in 1955 discovered the antiproton with E. G. Segrè (1905--89) and shared the Nobel Prize for Physics (1959) with him?
Owen Chamberlain

(1920--2012) What American jazz pianist, composer, and bandleader formed a quartet in his name in 1951 and gained a reputation as an experimental musician, winning international recognition with the album Time out (1959), which included ``Take five''?
Dave Brubeck

(1920--2012) What American science fiction writer wrote works like The martian chronicles (1950), Fahrenheit 451 (1951), and the semi-autobiographical Green town trilogy: Dandelion wine (1957), Something wicked this way comes (1962), and Farewell summer (2006)?
Ray Bradbury

(1923--77) What American-born operatic soprano of Greek parentage was a coloratura soprano whose bel canto style of singing was especially suited to nineteenth-century Italian opera?
Maria Callas

(1924--2004) What American actor and exponent of method acting first attracted in the stage production of A streetcar named desire (1947), starred in the movie version four years later, and is also noted for On the waterfront (1954), The godfather (1972), and Apocalypse now (1979)?
Marlon Brando

(1925--2016) What influential French composer and conductor was the principal conductor of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra from 1971 to 1978 and wrote an article entitled ``Schoenberg est mort''?
Pierre Boulez

(1926--2019) What Argentinian-born American architect's designs incorporate the special characteristics of each project, such as the World Financial Center and its Winter Garden (1980--89) in New York City and Founders Hall (1987--92) in Charlotte, North Carolina? He also designed the Wells Fargo Centre and the Petronas Twin Towers.
Cesar Pelli

(1929--2002) What American writer, theologian, and rabbi wrote novels like The chosen (1967), The book of lights (1981), and I am the clay (1992), as well as nonfiction and plays?
Chaim Potok

(1931--2007) What Russian statesman resigned from the Communist Party after becoming president of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic in 1990 and faced opposition to his reforms?
Boris Yeltsin

(1934--96) What American astronomer showed that amino acids could be synthesized in an artificial primordial soup irradiated by ultraviolet light as a model for a possible mechanism of the origin of life on Earth, wrote several popular science books, and co-produced the television series Cosmos (1980)?
Carl Sagan

(1935--2015) This South African's anti-apartheid novel Looking on darkness (1973) became the first novel in Afrikaans to be banned by the South African government. Identify this novelist, short-story writer, and playwright whose notable works include the novel A dry white season (1979) and the memoir A fork in the road (2009).
André Brink

(1936--59) What American rock-and-roll singer, guitarist, and songwriter who died in an airplane crash recorded such hits as ``That'll be the day'' with his band, The Crickets, before going solo in 1958?
Buddy Holly

(1940--96) What Russian-born American poet and 1991 poet laureate wrote both in Russian and English, was most famous for his collection The end of a beautiful era (1977), and won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1987?
Joseph Brodsky

(Acer negundo) What American maple of damp soils has leaves resembling the ash and green or purplish twigs?
box elder

(b. 1923) What American pilot became the first person to break the sound barrier when he piloted the Bell X-1 rocket research aircraft at high altitude to a level-flight speed of 670 mph in 1947?
Chuck Yeager

(b. 1928) This theoretical linguist is noted for expounding the theory of generative grammar and also theorized that linguistic behaviour is innate, not learned, and that all languages share the same underlying grammatical base. Name this American who wrote Syntactic structures (1957) and Aspects of the theory of syntax (1965).
Noam Chomsky

(b. 1937) What Russian chess player and world champion was defeated by Bobby Fischer in 1972, moved to Paris in 1975, and had a rematch in 1992 against Fischer, which he again lost?
Boris Spassky

(b. 1946) What Spanish opera singer, noted for his work in operas by Verdi and Puccini, was one of the Three Tenors?
José Carreras

(b. 1954) What American tennis player won the women's singles title at seven French Open, six US Open, three Wimbledon, and two Australian Open tournaments from 1974 to 1986?
Chris Evert

(b. 1956) What Swedish tennis player won the men's singles title at six French Open and five consecutive Wimbledon tournaments from 1974 to 1981?
Björn Borg

(c. 347--407, feast day: 27 January) What Doctor of the Church and bishop of Constantinople's attempts to reform the corrupt state of the court, clergy, and people caused him to be banished in 403?
St. John Chrysostom

(c. 1764--93) What English seaman and mutineer, as first mate under Captain Bligh on the HMS Bounty, seized the ship and cast Bligh and others adrift in April 1789, settling on Pitcairn Island in 1790?
Fletcher Christian

(c. 150--c. 215, feast 5 December) What Greek theologian related the ideas of Greek philosophy to the Christian faith?
St. Clement of Alexandria

(c. 325--297 BC) What Indian emperor founded the Mauryan empire and annexed provinces in Afghanistan from Alexander's Greek successors?
Chandragupta Maurya

(c. 688--741) What Frankish ruler of the eastern part of the Frankish kingdom from 715 and the whole kingdom from 719 was the grandfather of Charlemagne and began Carolingian power?
Charles Martel

(c. 1450--1516) What painter, whose highly detailed works are typically crowded with half-human, half-animal creatures and grotesque demons in settings symbolic of sin and folly, is best known for The garden of earthly delights, Table of the seven deadly sins, Death and the miser, and The haywain?
Hieronymus Bosch

(c. 1476--1507) What Italian statesman, cardinal, and general was the illegitimate son of Pope Alexander VI and brother of Lucrezia?
Cesare Borgia

(c. 1494--1534) What Italian painter's devotional and mythological paintings influenced the rococo style of the eighteenth century?
Antonio Allegri da Correggio

(c. 1510--54) What Spanish explorer's expeditions into Arizona and New Mexico from Mexico opened the Southwest to Spanish colonization?
Francisco Vásquez de Coronado

(c. 1734--1820) What American pioneer made trips west from North Carolina into what is now Kentucky, organizing settlements and successfully defending them from attacks carried out by North American Indians, and later moved further west to Missouri, having been granted land there in 1799?
Daniel Boone

(d. 681 BC) What king of Assyria (705--681) and son of Sargon II put down a Jewish rebellion, laying siege to Jerusalem but sparing it from destruction (according to 2 Kings 19.35) in 701, and also rebuilt the city of Nineveh and made it his capital?
Sennacherib

(feast 23 November) What pope (c. 88--c. 97) was probably the third after St. Peter?
St. Clement

Of what is a briquette a block?
compressed charcoal/coal dust

A mineral is botryoidal if it has a shape reminiscent of what?
cluster of grapes

A subject or issue over which there is continuing disagreement is called a bone of what?
contention

A subject or issue over which there is continuing disagreement is called a bone of what?
contention

According to Homer, Apollo sometimes took the guise of whom, the physician of the gods whose name gave rise to a word referring to a joyous song or hymn of praise, tribute, thanksgiving, or triumph or a work that praises or honours its subject?
Paean

What is the room in which the Last Supper was held called?
cenacle

What was niobium once called?
columbium

At the base of what range of mountains, part of the Coast Ranges in southern Alaska, does Anchorage lie, noted for its glaciers that flow south into the Gulf of Alaska?
Chugach Mountains

At what ancient small town in Galilee is Christ said to have performed his first miracle by changing water into wine during a marriage feast (John 2.1--11)?
Cana

At what country retreat of the president, in the Catoctin Mountains (part of the Blue Ridge Mountains) in northeastern Maryland, did President Carter host talks between Israel and Egypt, resulting in a 1979 peace treaty?
Camp David

At what inlet's northern end does Anchorage lie?
Cook Inlet

At what point of sailing does the wind blow from slightly in front of the beam?
close reach

At what point or area of the skull do the sagittal and coronal sutures joining the parietal and frontal bones come together?
bregma

Beneath what canopy are Jewish marriage ceremonies performed?
chuppah

By what cords is a hammock suspended in a sailing boat?
clews

By what knot is a rope secured by passing it twice around a spar or another rope that it crosses at right angles in such a way that both ends pass under the loop of rope at the front?
clove hitch

By what name are Italian peasants or rustics known?
contadino

By what natural or artificial process is carbon dioxide removed from the atmosphere and held in solid or liquid form?
carbon sequestration

What is an excessively arched foot with an unnaturally high instep called?
claw foot

By whom was Boston founded under the Massachusetts Bay Company?
John Winthrop

What river was Caesar crossing as he said ``alea iacta est''?
Rubicon

Complete the proverb, which means ``even the most gifted person occasionally makes mistakes'': ``[---] sometimes nods.''
Homer

Define ``bedizen.''
dress up or decorate gaudily

Define ``besmirch.''
damage the reputation of (someone or something) in the opinion of others; make (something) dirty or discoloured

Define ``bourgeoisie.''
polysemous French term referring to the capitalist class that owns most of society's wealth and means of production

Define ``captious.''
tending to find fault or raise petty objections

Define ``chasmic.''
(of a space or divide) extremely deep or large

Define ``coetaneous.''
having the same age or date of origin; contemporary

Define ``condign.''
appropriate to the crime or wrongdoing; fitting and deserved

Define ``corpulent.''
(of a person) fat

Define ``credulous.''
having or showing too great a readiness to believe things

Define ``despondent.''
in low spirits from loss of hope or courage

Define ``emblazon.''
conspicuously inscribe or display a design on; depict (a heraldic device) on something; celebrate or extol publicly

Define ``enmity.''
the state or feeling of being actively opposed or hostile to someone or something

Define ``eviscerate.''
disembowel

Define ``exhortation.''
address or communication emphatically urging someone to do something

Define ``extort.''
obtain (something) by force, threats, or other unfair means

Define ``frivolous.''
not having any serious purpose or value

Define ``gainsay.''
deny or contradict (a fact or statement; speak against or oppose (someone)

Define ``garrulous.''
excessively talkative, especially on trivial matters

Define ``inhere.''
exist essentially or permanently in; (law) (of rights, powers, etc.) be vested in a person or group or attached to the ownership of a property

Define ``insidious.''
proceeding in a gradual, subtle way, but with harmful effects

Define ``languish.''
(of a person or other living thing) lose or lack vitality; grow weak or feeble; suffer from being forced to remain in an unpleasant place or situation

Define ``manifest'' as an adjective.
clear or obvious to the eye or mind

Define ``pallid.''
(of a person's face) pale, typically because of poor health; feeble or insipid

Define ``perspicacious.''
having a ready insight into and understanding of things

Define ``presage.''
(of an event) be a sign or warning that (something, typically something bad) will happen; (of a person) predict; a feeling of presentiment or foreboding

Define ``pretence.''
attempt to make something that is not the case appear true

Define ``prudish.''
having or revealing a tendency to be easily shocked by matters relating to sex or nudity; excessively concerned with sexual propriety

Define ``purport.''
appear or claim to be or do something, especially falsely; profess

Define ``reckoning.''
the action or process of calculating or estimating something; a person's view, opinion, or judgment; the avenging or punishing of past mistakes or misdeeds

Define ``seditious.''
inciting or causing people to rebel against the authority of a state or monarch

Define ``slovenly.''
(especially of a person or their appearance) messy and dirty; (especially of a person or action) careless; excessively casual

Define ``snivelling.''
the action of crying and sniffing in a feeble or fretful way

Define ``stalwart.''
loyal, reliable, and hardworking

Define ``surfeit.''
excessive amount of something

Define ``transpicuous.''
transparent; easily understood, lucid

Define ``vehement.''
showing strong feeling; forceful, passionate, or intense

Define ``vexing.''
causing annoyance, frustration, or worry

For what does ``BGH'' stand?
bovine growth hormone: natural hormone in cattle that helps regulate growth and milk production and that may be produced artificially and given to dairy cattle to increase the yield of milk

For what does ``BSE'' stand?
bovine spongiform encephalopathy: usually fatal disease of cattle affecting the central nervous system, causing agitation and staggering; it is thought to be caused by an agent such as a prion or a virino, and its possible connection with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans is still much debated

For what is ``breakbone fever'' another name?
dengue

For what is ``captcha'' an acronym?
Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart

For what is ``cembalo'' another term?
harpsichord

For what is ``cilantro'' another term?
coriander

For what kind of composition is Monteverdi best known?
madrigal

From the French for ``cowherd,'' what large, powerful dog of a rough-coated breed originated in Belgium?
Bouvier (des Flandres)

From the Russian for ``self-publishing house,'' what word refers to the clandestine copying and distribution of literature banned by the state, especially formerly in the communist countries of eastern Europe?
samizdat

From what reed instrument of the early eighteenth century was the clarinet developed?
chalumeau

From what small, slender, bipedal, carnivorous dinosaur with long forelimbs are the birds believed to have evolved?
coelurosaur

From what work does ``panem et circenses'' `bread and circuses' originate?
Juvenal's Satires (x.80)

From what work does the Latin phrase ``carpe diem'' `seize the day' come?
Horace's Odes

From what work does the phrase ``omnes una manet nox'' come, and how does it translate into English?
Horace's Odes, ``one night is awaiting us all"

From what work does the proverb ``brevity is the soul of wit'' originate?
Shakespeare's Hamlet (2.2.90)

From what work does the term ``men in buckram'' originate?
Shakespeare's 1 Henry IV

From where did Copernicus hail?
Poland

Historically described in the West as being elephant's foot motifs, what medallion-like, octagonal design element typical of traditional hand-woven carpets from Central and West Asia is often repeated to form the pattern in the main field in Turkmen weavings?
gul

How do you say ``each to their own taste'' in French?
chacun à son goût

How does ``mea culpa'' translate into English?
by my fault

How does ``Chapultepec'' translate into English?
Grasshopper Hill

How does ``coup d'état'' translate into English?
blow of state

How is wine at room temperature described?
chambré

How many counties comprise Northern Ireland?
six

How many letters does the Arabic alphabet have?
twenty-eight

How many members comprise the Conference on Disarmament?
sixty-five

How many piano concertos did Chopin compose?
two

How many sessions comprised the Council of Trent?
three

How would one say ``I confess to Almighty God'' in Latin?
Confiteor Deo Omnipotenti

Identify the liquid unsaturated fatty acid that occurs in most animal fats, is a precursor of prostaglandins, and is considered essential in animal nutrition.
arachidonic acid

Identify the name of the large, highly venomous southern African tree snake, the male of which is bright green and the female dull olive brown, whose name comes from the Dutch for ``tree'' + ``snake.''
boomslang

Identify the organized branch of the Mafia whose name comes from the Italian for ``district, village."
borgata

Identify the type of aria in which the voice or accompaniment imitates sounds of nature or is otherwise descriptive.
aria d'imitazione

Identify the work of Shakespeare from which these lines come: ``To gild refined gold, to paint the lily, / To throw a perfume on the violet, / To smooth the ice, or add another hue / Unto the rainbow, or with taper-light / To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish, / Is wasteful and ridiculous excess.''
King John

If a being has a mantle or pallium like that of a mollusk, what is it called?
chlamydate

If someone is very shy or reticent, then to what wouldn't they say ``boo''?
goose

If someone is very shy or reticent, then they wouldn't say ``boo'' to a what?
goose

If something is cervine, what is it like?
deer

If you have been born into a reigning family or privileged class, you are said to be ``born to the [---].''
purple

In what ballet jump does the dancer extend one leg into the air forward or backward, bring the other up to meet it, and land on the second foot?
cabriole

In what ballet jump does the dancer sweep one leg into the air to the side while jumping off the other, bring both legs together in the air, and beat them before landing?
brisé

In what century was Borobodur built?
circa the ninth

In what corner of the Kaaba is a sacred Black Stone set?
south-east

In what county are the Cotswold Hills mainly located?
Gloucestershire

In what desert is the Salton Sea located?
Colorado Desert

In what event does a large cloud of energetic and highly magnetized plasma erupt from the solar corona into space, causing radio and magnetic disturbances on the earth?
coronal mass ejection

In what Indian state is Coimbatore found?
Tamil Nadu

In what rhetorical or literary figure are words, grammatical constructions, or concepts repeated in reverse order, in the same or a modified form?
chiasmus

In what school for Jewish children are Hebrew and religious knowledge taught --- its name comes from the Hebrew for ``room''?
cheder

In what sea is Chios located?
Aegean Sea

In what single-engined monoplane did Lindbergh make the first solo transatlantic flight?
Spirit of St. Louis

In what state are the Clearwater Mountains located?
Idaho

In what variety of peach or nectarine does the flesh adhere to the stone?
clingstone

In what village did the Buddha attain enlightenment?
Bodhgaya

In what year did the Boston Tea Party take place?
1773

Name the phrase Macduff uses here in Shakespeare's Macbeth, meaning ``all at one time'': ``He has no children. All my pretty ones, / Did you say all? O hell-kite, all? / What, all my pretty chickens and their dam / [---]?'' (4.3.216--219).
at one fell swoop

Name three former names for Ismail Samani Peak.
Mount Garmo, Stalin Peak, Communism Peak

Of what group of Afro-Asiatic languages is Hausa part?
Chadic

Of what group was Pierre Bonnard part?
les nabis

Of what group was Pierre Bonnard part?
les nabis

Of what is calamari comprised?
squid

Of what island group is Bora-Bora part?
Society Islands

Of what mountain system are the Catskills part?
Appalachian

Often compared with Folsom, what Paleo-Indian culture of Central and North America, dated to about 11,500--11,000 years ago and earlier, is distinguished by heavy leaf-shaped stone spearheads?
Clovis

On what body of water is Cardiff located?
Bristol Channel

On what date is Burns Night celebrated for the birthday of the Scottish poet Robert Burns?
25 January

On what inlet of the Atlantic in southern Maine, known for its hundreds of islands and protected anchorages, does Portland lie?
Casco Bay

On what island is Cagliari located?
Sardinia

On what island is the Buddhist monument Borobudur located?
Java

On what river is Cologne?
Rhine

On what river is Cottbus located?
Spree River

On what river is Derry located?
River Foyle

On what river is Durham located?
Wear River

On what ship of the British navy did part of its crew, led by Fletcher Christian, mutiny against their commander, William Bligh, setting him adrift in an open boat with eighteen crewmen?
Bounty

On what summit does Christ the Redeemer stand?
Corcovado

Once called the ``Truk Islands,'' what group of fourteen volcanic islands and numerous atolls in the western Pacific Ocean, in the Caroline Islands group, forms part of the Federated States of Micronesia?
Chuuk Islands

Probably a diminutive of the Old French for ``young shoot,'' what word refers to a slender threadlike appendage of a climbing plant, often growing in a spiral form, that stretches out and twines around any suitable support?
tendril

Taken from Virgil's Aeneid and used as the epigraph of Freud's The interpretation of dreams, what does ``Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo'' mean?
if I cannot bend the heavens above, I will move Hell

The doctrine that the Son is not of the same substance as the Father but was created as an agent for creating the world is associated to whom?
Arius

The dried bark of what South American evergreen tree is a source of quinine and other medicinal alkaloids?
cinchona

The fossilized remains of what Mesolithic human were found in a cave in a namesake Gorge in Somerset in 1903, the oldest complete skeleton found in Britain, representing a hunter-gatherer population predating the introduction of agriculture?
Cheddar man

This autonomous republic is in the Caucasus in southwestern Russia on the border with Georgia. It declared itself independent of Russia in 1991 and was invaded by Russian forces (1994). A peace treaty impelled the withdrawal of troops, but the Russians invaded again in 1999. Name this region whose capital is in Grozny.
Chechnya

This corporation is also called Heralds' College and comprises three Kings of Arms, six heralds, and four pursuivants. What corporation formed in 1484 officially records and grants armorial bearings?
College of Arms

This enchantress lived with her wild animals on the island of Aeaea. When Odysseus visited the island, his companions were changed into pigs by her potions, but he protected himself with the mythical herb moly and forced her to restore his men into human form. Identify her.
Circe

This figure of Greek mythos is the brother of Europa and the traditional founder of Thebes in Boeotia. He killed a dragon that guarded a spring, and when he sowed the dragon's teeth on Athena's advice, there came up a harvest of armed men, of whom he disposed the majority by setting them to fight one another, and the survivors formed the ancestors of the Theban nobility. Identify him.
Cadmus

This ornamental climbing plant is widely cultivated in the tropics and named after a French explorer. Identify the plant whose insignificant flowers are surrounded by brightly coloured papery bracts that persist on the plant for a long time.
bougainvillea

This region of the brain is concerned with the production of speech, located in the cortex of the dominant frontal lobe. Damage in this area causes a type of aphasia with the same name, characterized by hesitant and fragmented speech with little grammatical structure. Name this region named after a French surgeon of the nineteenth century.
Broca's area

Through what years did the House of Bourbon provide reigning kings of France?
1589--1792

Through what years was the Council of Trent held?
1545--1563

To what do tools of ignorance refer?
baseball catcher's equipment

To what feet-gill-possessing class do water fleas and fairy shrimp belong?
Branchiopoda

To what region of a chromosome do the microtubules of the spindle attach, via the kinetochore, during cell division?
centromere

To what ridge at the front of the head of the tibia or tibiotarsus is the main extensor muscle of the thigh attached, being particularly well developed in running species?
cnemial crest

To what short projection from the shoulder blade in mammals is part of the biceps attached?
coracoid

To what solid central part of a vertebra are the arches and processes attached?
centrum

To whom are the maxims of the Book of Proverbs attributed?
Solomon

To whom are the maxims of the Book of Proverbs attributed?
Solomon

To whom is the quotation ``tout est perdu fors l'honneur'' attributed?
Chateaubriand

Translate ``sapere aude.''
dare to know

Under the rule of whom did the building of the Colosseum begin, circa 75 AD?
Vespasian

What adjective denotes a verb that governs a non-finite form of another verb?
catenative

What adjective denotes an ancient Greek sculpture overlaid with gold and ivory?
chryselephantine

What adjective denotes granules or vesicles containing epinephrine and norepinephrine and the secretory cells of the adrenal medulla in which they are found?
chromaffin

What adjective denotes something concerning, belonging to, or inhabiting the underworld?
chthonic

What adjective denotes something on the southern side of the Alps?
cisalpine

What adjective denotes something relating to a mirror, reflector, or reflection?
catoptric

What adjective derived from the Latin for ``not'' + ``entreat'' describes something impossible to stop or to prevent?
inexorable

What adjective describes a gem cut en cabochon showing a band of bright reflected light caused by aligned inclusions in the stone?
chatoyant

What adjective describes something club-shaped?
clavate

What adjective describes something related to the cheek?
buccal

What adjective describes something written from right to left and from left to right in alternate lines?
boustrophedon

What adjective describing ``using high-flown or bombastic language'' comes from the Latin for ``great'' + ``speaking''?
magniloquent

What adjective from the Latin for ``desire, lust'' describes something showing excessive sexual drive and lustful?
libidinous

What adjective is defined as ``consisting of three in one''?
triune

What adjective is used to describe a drug that relieves flatulence?
carminative

What adjective is used to describe an optical system that involves reflecting and refracting light to reduce aberration?
catadioptric

What adjective is used to describe something resembling or having the texture of leather?
coriaceous

What adjective refers to either a word having the same linguistic derivation as another or, formally, anything related or connected?
cognate

What adjective, also referring to a Greek poet of the eighth century BC, describes something epic and large-scale?
Homeric

What adjective, deriving its name from a favourite of Empress Catherine II of Russia who reputedly gave the order for sham villages to be built for the empress's tour of the Crimea in 1787, refers to something false or deceptive in appearance, especially one presented for propaganda?
Potemkin

What advanced version of a heliostat, having a rotating mirror that continuously reflects the light from the same area of sky, allows the path of a celestial object to be monitored?
coelostat

What alphabet of Nagari type is used in writing Bihari and eastern Hindi?
Kaithi

What Alpine Austrian state is the southernmost Austrian state and has its capital in Klagenfurt?
Carinthia

What American astronaut, commander of the 1969 Appollo 12 lunar mission, was the third man to set foot on the moon?
Pete Conrad

What amino acid derivative involved in the transport of fatty acids for metabolism and sometimes used as a dietary supplement was originally discovered in meat extracts?
carnitine

What anaerobic bacterium of a large genus includes many pathogenic species, like those causing tetanus, gas gangrene, botulism, and other forms of food poisoning?
clostridium

What ancient deity of Memphis, creator of the universe, god of artisans, and husband of Sekhmet became one of the chief deities of Egypt and was identified by the Greeks with Hephaestus?
Ptah

What ancient Greek and Roman stringed musical instrument was similar to the lyre?
cithara

What ancient Greek or Roman herald's wand, typically with two serpents twined around it, is carried by the messenger god Hermes or Mercury?
caduceus

What ancient Greek sport combined wrestling and boxing?
pankration

What ancient Hebrew unit of capacity equal to about ten and a half or later eleven and a half bushels shares its name with a Greek poet?
homer

What ancient Jewish tradition of mystical interpretation of the Bible, first transmitted orally and using esoteric methods (including ciphers), reached the height of its influence in the later Middle Ages and remains significant in Hasidism?
Kabbalah

What ancient Mediterranean seaport, located on the site of modern Jebeil, north of Beirut in Lebanon, was a thriving Phoenician city in the second millennium BC?
Byblos

What ancient nomadic people overran Asia Minor in the seventh century BC?
Cimmerians

What ancient region of central Asia Minor, between Lake Tuz and the Euphrates, north of Cilicia, was an important centre of early Christianity?
Cappadocia

What ancient region of Europe corresponded to modern France, Belgium, the southern Netherlands, southwestern Germany, and northern Italy?
Gaul

What ancient region of southwestern Asia Minor is south of the Maeander River and northwest of Lycia?
Caria

What ancient region south of the Caucasus mountains at the eastern end of the Black Sea was the goal of Jason's expedition for the Golden Fleece in classical mythos?
Colchis

What ancient Roman liquid measure of one-eighth of an amphora is equal in modern terms to about 6.4 pints (3.6 litres)?
congius

What ancient time-measuring device worked by a flow of water?
clepsydra

What Andean mountain in central Ecuador is the highest active volcano in the world, its name meaning ``shining peak'' in Quechua?
Cotopaxi

What Anglo-Saxon monk and poet of the seventh century is said to have been an illiterate herdsman who was inspired in a vision to compose poetry on biblical themes?
Caedmon

What antecedent to bridge had a treatise written by Edmond Hoyle in 1742?
whist

What antelope with a reddish-brown coat and white face is found in eastern South Africa?
bontebok

What antelope with a reddish-brown coat and white face is found in eastern South Africa?
bontebok

What anthropological term is a number expressing the ratio of the maximum breadth of a skull to its maximum length?
cephalic index

What antidepressant drug (C13H18ClNO) is also given to relieve the symptoms of nicotine withdrawal and also called ``Zyban'' (a trademark)?
bupropion

What antihistamine and sulphur-containing derivative of imidazole is used to treat stomach acidity and peptic ulcers?
cimetidine

What apple brandy is traditionally made in a region of Normandy of the same name?
Calvados

What archaic term referred to an appearance of St. Elmo's fire on a mast, rigging, or other structure?
corposant

What architectural adjective denotes something relating to the lavishly ornamented late Spanish baroque style, named after a Spanish architect who worked in this style?
Churrigueresque

What are belles-lettres?
essays, particularly on literary and artistic criticism, written and read primarily for their aesthetic effect

What are bread and circuses?
palliatives offered especially to avert potential discontent

What are dregs?
the remnants of a liquid left in a container, together with any sediment or grounds

What are the four kinds of conic sections?
circle, ellipse, hyperbola, parabola

What are the lyrics of ``O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden'' that were set by Bach?
O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden, / Voll Schmerz und voller Hohn, / O Haupt, zum Spott gebunden / Mit einer Dornenkron; / O Haupt, sonst schön gezieret / Mit höchster Ehr' und Zier, / Jetzt aber höchst schimpfieret: / Gegrüßet sei'st du mir! / Du edles Angesichte, / Davor sonst schrickt und scheut / Das große Weltgewichte, / Wie bist du so bespeit! / Wie bist du so erbleichet! / Wer hat dein Augenlicht, / Dem sonst kein Licht nicht gleichet, / So schändlich zugericht't?

What are the lyrics to Schiller's ``An die Freude''?
O Freunde, nicht diese Töne! / Sondern laßt uns angenehmere / anstimmen und freudenvollere! / Freude, schöner Götterfunken, / Tochter aus Elysium, / Wir betreten feuertrunken, / Himmlische, dein Heiligtum! / Deine Zauber binden wieder, / Was die Mode streng geteilt; / Alle Menschen werden Brüder, / Wo dein sanfter Flügel weilt. / Wem der große / Wurf gelungen, / Eines Freundes Freund zu sein, / Wer ein holdes Weib errungen, / Mische seinen Jubel ein! / Ja, wer auch nur eine Seele / Sein nennt auf dem Erdenrund! / Und wer's nie gekonnt, der stehle / Weinend sich aus diesem Bund. / Freude trinken alle Wesen / An den Brüsten der Natur; / Alle Guten, alle Bösen / Folgen ihrer Rosenspur. / Küsse gab sie uns und Reben, / Einen Freund, geprüft im Tod; / Wollust ward dem Wurm gegeben, / Und der Cherub steht vor Gott! / Froh, wie seine Sonnen fliegen / Durch des Himmels prächt'gen Plan, / Laufet, Brüder, eure Bahn, / Freudig, wie ein Held zum Siegen. / Seid umschlungen, Millionen. / Diesen Kuß der ganzen Welt! / Brüder! Über'm Sternenzelt / Muß ein lieber Vater wohnen. / Ihr stürzt nieder, Millionen? / Ahnest du den Schöpfer, Welt? / Such' ihn über'm Sternenzelt! / Über Sternen muß er wohnen.

What are the official languages of Burundi?
French, Kirundi

What are the spaces between pieces of flat scenery on a stage or in a theatre called?
coulisses

What are the three principal people groups of Botswana?
Tswana, Kalanga, San (Bushman)

What are the two Chatham Islands of New Zealand?
Pitt, Chatham

What are the two main island groups of the British Antarctic Territory?
South Shetland Islands, South Orkney Islands

What are the two official languages of Comoros?
Arabic, French

What are the words to Hamlet's best-known soliloquy?
To be, or not to be, that is the question: / Whether `tis nobler in the mind to suffer / The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, / Or to take arms against a sea of troubles / And by opposing end them. To die—to sleep, / No more; and by a sleep to say we end / The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks / That flesh is heir to: `tis a consummation / Devoutly to be wish'd. To die, to sleep; / To sleep, perchance to dream—ay, there's the rub: / For in that sleep of death what dreams may come, / When we have shuffled off this mortal coil, / Must give us pause—there's the respect / That makes calamity of so long life. / For who would bear the whips and scorns of time, / Th'oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, / The pangs of dispriz'd love, the law's delay, / The insolence of office, and the spurns / That patient merit of th'unworthy takes, / When he himself might his quietus make / With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear, / To grunt and sweat under a weary life, / But that the dread of something after death, / The undiscovere'd country, from whose bourn / No traveller returns, puzzles the will, / And makes us rather bear those ills we have / Than fly to others that we know not of? / Thus conscience doth make cowards of us all, / And thus the native hue of resolution / Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought, / And enterprises of great pith and moment / With this regard their currents turn awry / And lose the name of action.

What assertion states that there is no set whose cardinality is strictly between that of the integers and the real numbers?
continuum hypothesis

What asymmetrical arrangement of the human figure has the line of the arms and shoulders contrasting with, while balancing, those of the hips and legs?
contrapposto

What austere contemplative order was founded by St. Bruno in 1084?
Carthusians

What Australian tennis player won more Grand Slam events than any other player (sixty-two)?
Margaret Smith Court

What autonomous region of central Spain has its capital in Toledo?
Castilla--La Mancha

What autonomous region of northern Spain has its capital in Valladolid?
Castilla-León

What bacterial disease typically affecting cattle and buffalo and causes undulant fever in humans?
brucellosis

What band of tissue on the lowest part of a horse's pastern contains the horn-producing cells from which the hoof grows?
coronet

What basic monetary unit of Cameroon, Congo, Gabon, and the Central African Republic is equal to 100 centimes?
CFA franc

What basic monetary unit of Ghana is equal to 100 pesewas?
cedi

What bed of shale exposed in the Rocky Mountains in British Columbia, Canada, dated to the Cambrian period (about 530 million years ago), is rich in well-preserved fossils of early marine invertebrates, many of which represent evolutionary lineages unknown in later times?
Burgess Shale

What beet is of a variety with broad white leaf stalks that may be prepared and eaten separately from the green parts of the leaf?
chard

What bicyclic compound with fused benzene and furan rings, with the chemical formula C8H6O, is present in coal tar and used to make thermoplastic resins for paints and varnishes?
coumarone

What billiards stroke involves the cue ball striking two balls successively?
carom

What biological term refers to the coalescence or growing together of parts originally separate?
concrescence

What bird family comprises the crows?
Corvidae

What black China tea comes from the last crop of the season and is usually considered low quality?
bohea

What black China tea comes from the last crop of the season and is usually considered low quality?
bohea

What bodily humour was identified with bile and believed to be associated with a peevish or irascible temperament?
choler

What botanical term refers to a flattened leaflike stem?
cladode

What Bourgogne wine is grown in the Vignoble de la côte de Nuits region in a town of the same name?
Gevrey Chambertin

What branch of geology is concerned with establishing the absolute ages of strata?
chronostratigraphy

What Brazilian state's capital is Fortaleza?
Ceará

What breed of large white beef cattle was named after the hills in eastern France where the breed originated?
Charolais

What breed of sheep is often crossed with other breeds to produce lambs for the meat industry?
Border Leicester

What British cavalry charge in 1854 of the Battle of Balaclava in the Crimean War involved a fatal misunderstanding and was immortalized in verse by Tennyson?
Charge of the Light Brigade

What British racing cyclist born in 1980 holds the record for the most Olympic medals won by a British athlete (eight) and was the first British winner of the Tour de France in 2012?
Sir Bradley Wiggins

What British term historically referred to the right to fish in water belonging to someone else?
common of piscary

What brittle reddish-brown crystalline mineral with an iridescent purple tarnish and consisting of a sulphide of copper and iron was named after a prominent eighteenth-century Austrian mineralogist?
bornite

What broad band of nerve fibres joins the two hemispheres of the brain?
corpus callosum

What broad border is used as a charge in a coat of arms, often as a mark of difference?
bordure

What burrowing wormlike amphibian of a tropical order is distinguished by poorly developed eyes and the lack of limbs?
caecilian

What Canadian Conservative was prime minister (1894--96)?
Sir Mackenzie Bowell

What cancer of the lymphatic system, caused by the Epstein--Barr virus, chiefly affects children in central Africa?
Burkitt's lymphoma

What cape in southwestern Spain is southeast of Cádiz at the western end of the Strait of Gibraltar and was the site of a historic battle?
Cape Trafalgar

What cape is the site of the John F. Kennedy Space Center?
Cape Canaveral

What capsule-shaped membranous structure surrounding the glomerulus of each nephron in the kidneys of mammals extracts wastes, excess salts, and water from the blood?
Bowman's capsule

What celestial object, intermediate in size between a giant planet and a small star, is believed to emit mainly infrared radiation?
brown dwarf

What character in Italian commedia dell'arte is the mistress of Harlequin?
Columbine

What chief port of Romania was formerly called ``Tomis'' and renamed for a Roman emperor?
Constanţa

What Christian festival is held on 2 February to commemorate the purification of the Virgin Mary (after childbirth, according to Jewish law) and the presentation of Christ in the Temple?
Candlemas

What circular symbol depicts a snake, or less commonly a dragon, swallowing its tail, as an emblem of wholeness or infinity?
uroboros

What city in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia in Germany was the capital of the Federal Republic of Germany from 1949 to 1990?
Bonn

What city in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia in Germany was the capital of the Federal Republic of Germany from 1949 to 1990?
Bonn

What city on St. Thomas named after the queen consort to King Christian V of Denmark-Norway is the capital of the Virgin Islands of the United States and was initially named ``Taphus'' `beer house'?
Charlotte Amalie

What city on the Mures River in western Romania has hosted one of the first music conservatories in Europe, one of the earliest normal schools in Europe, and the first car factory in Hungary and present-day Romania?
Arad

What city on the Orne is the capital of Basse-Normandie?
Caen

What city was the capital of French Equatorial Africa from 1910 to 1958?
Brazzaville

What class comprises the barnacles that settle on rocks, submerged timbers, corals, shells, and the undersides of ships?
Cirripedia

What class of fishes includes those with a cartilaginous skeleton?
Chondrichthyes

What class of myriapod arthropods comprises the centipedes?
Chilopoda

What class of parasitic flatworms comprises the tapeworms?
Cestoda

What clear watery fluid fills the space between the arachnoid membrane and the pia mater?
cerebrospinal fluid

What closed horse-drawn carriage with four wheels, seating four inside and two outside next to the coachman, was named after a duke later named William IV?
Clarence

What cloud forming a broken layer of small fleecy clouds at high altitude, usually 16,500--45,000 feet (5--13 km), typically has a rippled or granulated appearance (as in a mackerel sky)?
cirrocumulus

What cloud forms a thin, more or less uniform, semitranslucent layer at high altitude, usually 16,500--45,000 feet (5--13 km)?
cirrostratus

What cloud forms wispy filamentous tufted streaks (``mare's tails'') at high altitude, usually 16,500--45,000 feet (5--13 km)?
cirrus

What coastal area of southeastern France, along the Mediterranean Sea and roughly coterminous with the French Riviera, includes the towns of Cannes, Saint Tropez, Juan-les-Pins, and Antibes and the city of Nice, as well as the principality of Monaco?
Côte d'Azur

What coastal city in northeastern Tunisia is also called ``Grand Tunis''?
Aryanah

What cocktail is made with brandy, chocolate liqueur, and cream?
brandy Alexander

What code of honour and morals was developed by the Japanese samurai?
bushido

What coenzyme derived from pantothenic acid is important in respiration and many other biochemical reactions?
coenzyme A

What common cavity at the end of the digestive tract for the release of both excretory and genital products in vertebrates (except most mammals) and certain invertebrates is present in birds, reptiles, amphibians, most fish, and monotremes?
cloaca

What composer and pianist eschewed program music and opera, writing four symphonies, four concertos, chamber and piano music, choral works, and nearly two hundred songs?
Johannes Brahms

What condition is characterized by brief attacks of deep sleep often occurring with cataplexy and hypnagogic hallucinations?
narcolepsy

What constellation (the Crab) is said to represent a crab crushed under the foot of Hercules and is most noted for the globular star cluster of Praesepe (the Beehive cluster)?
Cancer

What contusion results from the brain contacting the skull on the side opposite from where impact occurs?
contrecoup

What convex dark or coloured glass, named after the French painter Lorrain, reflects a small image in subdued colours and is used by landscape painters to show the tonal values of a scene?
Claude glass

What Coptic-derived word is given to the dried, pressed roe of the mullet, sold in blocks and shaved over Italian dishes?
bottarga

What countries bound the Caspian Sea (alphabetically)?
Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, Turkmenistan

What countries form the Commonwealth of Independent States?
Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan

What county in the central part of the Republic of Ireland, in the province of Leinster, has its county town in Tullamore?
Offaly

What county in the eastern part of the Republic of Ireland, in the province of Leinster, has its county town in Navan?
Meath

What county in the extreme northwest of the Republic of Ireland is part of the old province of Ulster and has its capital in Lifford?
Donegal

What county in the Republic of Ireland, in the northwestern part of the province of Connacht, has its county town in Castlebar?
Mayo

What county in the Republic of Ireland, in the province of Munster, has its county town in Clonmel?
Tipperary

What county in the Republic of Ireland, on the western coast in the province of Munster, has its county town in Ennis?
Clare

What county of the Republic of Ireland in the province of Leinster has its county town in Naas?
Kildare

What county of the Republic of Ireland in the province of Leinster was formerly known as ``Queen's County''?
Laois

What county of the Republic of Ireland on the southwestern coast in the province of Munster has its county town in Tralee?
Kerry

What county of the Republic of Ireland, in the province of Connacht, has its county town in Carrick-on-Shannon?
Leitrim

What county of the Republic of Ireland, in the province of Leinster, has its county town in Mullingar?
Westmeath

What county of the Republic of Ireland, on the eastern coast in the province of Leinster, has its county town in Dundalk?
Louth

What covered urn was used in ancient Egyptian burials to hold the entrails from an embalmed body?
Canopic jar

What creator god in later Hinduism forms a triad with Vishnu the preserver and Shiva the destroyer?
Brahma

What creature in Greek myth had the head, arms, and torso of a man and the body and legs of a horse?
centaur

What crystalline acid is made by distilling malic acid and used in making synthetic resins?
maleic acid/cis-butenedioic acid

What crystalline acid is obtained by oxidation of arabinose, dextrose, or levulose and used in synthesizing riboflavin?
arabonic acid

What custom in some cultures involves a man taking to his bed and going through certain rituals when his child is being born, as though he were physically affected by the birth?
couvade

What cyclic form of adenylic acid plays a major role in controlling many enzyme-catalyzed processes in living cells?
cAMP (cyclic adenosine monophosphate)

What cyclical pattern of breathing involves movement gradually decreasing to a complete stop and then returning to normal, occurring in various medical conditions and at high altitudes?
Cheyne--Stokes breathing

What cytotoxic drug is used in the treatment of cancer and belongs to the class of nitrogen mustards?
chlorambucil

What dangerous whirlpool in a narrow channel of the sea was opposite the cave of the sea monster Scylla in Greek myth?
Charybdis

What Danish island in the Baltic Sea between Sjælland and Jutland has its chief city in Odense?
Fyn

What Danish island in the Baltic Sea is located southeast of Sweden and known as ``solskinsøen'' `sunshine island' because of its weather and ``klippeøen'' `rock island' because of its geology?
Bornholm

What dark nebula of dust near the Southern Cross gives the appearance of a gap in the stars of the Milky Way?
Coalsack

What daughter of the Trojan king Priam was given the gift of prophecy by Apollo, but when she cheated him, he turned this into a curse by causing her prophecies, though true, to be disbelieved?
Cassandra

What deep-bodied North Pacific salmon has small black spots and is also called ``silver salmon''?
coho

What deepest part (36,201 feet, 11,034 m) of the Mariana Trench in the North Pacific is named after the vessel that discovered it in 1948?
Challenger Deep

What deficiency disease is caused by inadequate intake of riboflavin and characterized by sores on the mouth?
ariboflavinosis

What deposit of urates in tissues is characteristic of gout?
tophus

What derogatory term from the Italian for ``pack of dogs'' refers to the common people or the masses?
canaille

What derogatory term refers to a man having or showing characteristics regarded as typical of a woman?
effeminate

What dessert apple of a variety with crisp flesh was first grown in New Zealand?
Braeburn

What device that uses large electromagnets to separate uranium isotopes from uranium ore was developed in the 1940s to produce highly enriched weapons-grade uranium?
calutron

What diagram shows the relative positions of genes along the length of a chromosome?
chromosome map

What digestive enzyme secreted by the pancreas breaks down proteins in the small intestine?
chymotrypsin

What disease caused by trypanosomes is transmitted by bloodsucking bugs, is endemic in South America, causes damage to the heart and central nervous system?
Chagas's disease

What disease characterized by inflammation and thrombosis in small and medium-sized blood vessels typically in the legs and leading to gangrene has been associated with smoking?
Buerger's disease

What disease involves a small intestinal hypersensitivity to gluten, leading to difficulty in digesting food?
celiac disease

What disease named after an English physician involves the chronic inflammation of the kidneys?
Bright's disease

What displacement pump with valves is used for raising water by steam partly by atmospheric pressure and partly by the direct action of the steam on the water without the intervention of a piston?
aquometre/pulsometre/vacuum pump

What do the Greek roots is--, iso-- mean?
equal, the same; ἴσος (isos); isometric, isomorphic, isotropic

What do the Greek roots leuc(o)--, leuk(o)-- mean?
white; λευκός leukos; leucocyte

What do the Greek roots meter--, metr-- mean?
measure; μέτρον (metron); metric, thermometer

What do the Latin roots in-- (1), im-- mean?
in, on; in; import, incur, intend, invite

What do the Latin roots in-- (2), il--, im--, ir-- mean?
not, un-- (negation); in--; illicit, impossible, inimical, irrational

What do the Latin roots irasc--, irat-- mean?
be angry; irasci; irascible, irate

What does the Latin root itiner-- mean?
iter, itineris; march, journey; itinerary

What do the Latin roots jac-- (originally IAC), --ject-- mean?
cast, throw; iacio, iacere, ieci, iectus - `to throw' (and cognates thereof); eject, interject, ejaculate, trajectory

What do the Latin roots jung--, junct-- mean?
join; jungere, junctus; conjunction, juncture

What do the Latin roots jus--, jur--, judic-- (originally IVS) mean?
law, justice; ius, iuris; iudex, iudicis; judge, jury, justice

What do the Latin roots juv--, jut-- mean?
help; juvare, jutus; adjutant

What do the Latin roots lab--, laps-- mean?
slide, slip; labi, lapsus; elapse, relapse

What do the Latin roots laud--, laus-- mean?
praise; laudere; laud

What do the Latin roots led-, les- mean?
hurt; laedere, laesus; lesion

What do the Latin roots linqu--, lict-- mean?
leave; linquere, lictus; relict, relinquish

What do the Latin roots loqu--, locut-- mean?
speak; loqui; allocution, eloquence

What do the Latin roots lud--, lus-- mean?
play; ludere, lusus; allude, illusion

What do the Latin roots mater--, matr-- mean?
mother; mater, matris; maternity, matriarch, matrix

What do the Latin roots medi--, --midi-- mean?
middle; medius, mediare; median, medieval

What do the Latin roots merg--, mers-- mean?
dip, plunge; mergere; emerge, immersion

What do the Latin roots misce--, mixt-- mean?
mix; miscere, mixtus; miscellaneous, mixture

What do the Latin roots mitt--, miss-- mean?
send; mittere, missus; intermittent, missionary, transmission

What do the Latin roots mov--, mot-- mean?
move, motion; movere, motus; mobile, momentum, motor, move

What do the Latin roots mulg--, muls-- mean?
milk; mulgere; emulsion

What does ``cogito, ergo sum'' mean?
I think, therefore I am

What does ``commensurate with'' mean?
in proportion to

What does ``natura non facit saltum'' mean?
nature makes no leap: in nature, things change gradually

What does ``to the marrow'' mean?
to one's innermost being

What does ``to the marrow'' mean?
to one's innermost being

What does ``apropos'' mean?
with reference to; concerning

What does ``arraign'' mean?
call or bring (someone) before a court to answer a criminal charge

What does ``befog'' mean?
cause to become confused

What does ``bonne femme'' mean as an adjective?
(of fish dishes, stews, and soups) cooked in a simple way

What does ``bonne femme'' mean as an adjective?
(of fish dishes, stews, and soups) cooked in a simple way

What does ``bosky'' mean?
wooded; covered by trees or bushes

What does ``BPA'' abbreviate?
bisphenol A: a synthetic organic compound used in the manufacture of epoxy resins and other polymers

What does ``BPR'' abbreviate?
business process re-engineering: the process or activity of restructuring a company's organization and methods, especially to exploit the capabilities of computers

What does ``bps'' abbreviate?
bits per second

What does ``brachiocephalic'' mean?
relating to both arm and head

What does ``bucolic'' mean?
relating to the pleasant aspects of the countryside and country life

What does ``burgeoning'' mean?
beginning to grow or increase rapidly; flourishing

What does ``caliginous'' mean?
misty, dim, obscure, dark

What does ``callipygian'' mean?
having well-shaped buttocks

What does ``cancroid'' mean?
like a crab

What does ``canorous'' mean?
melodious or resonant

What does ``capacious'' mean?
having a lot of space inside; roomy

What does ``cariogenic'' mean?
causing tooth decay

What does ``CCTV'' abbreviate?
closed-circuit television

What does ``CFA'' abbreviate?
Communauté Financière Africaine

What does ``circumspect'' mean?
careful to consider all circumstances and possible consequences

What does ``circumstantiate'' mean?
set forth or support with circumstances or details

What does ``circumvent'' mean?
find a way around (an obstacle); overcome (a problem or difficulty), typically in a clever and surreptitious way

What does ``CMOS'' abbreviate?
complementary metal oxide semiconductor

What does ``CMV'' abbreviate?
cytomegalovirus

What does ``CMYK'' abbreviate?
cyan, magenta, yellow, black

What does ``CoA'' abbreviate?
coenzyme A

What does ``conglobulate'' mean?
join closely together

What does ``COPD'' abbreviate?
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

What does ``coruscant'' mean?
sparkling

What does ``curt'' mean?
rudely brief

What does ``EEG'' abbreviate?
electroencephalogram

What does ``expunge'' mean?
erase or remove completely (something unwanted or unpleasant)

What does ``grovel'' mean?
lie or crawl abjectly on the ground with one's face downward

What does ``hedonic'' mean?
relating to or considered in terms of pleasant or unpleasant sensations

What does ``impel'' mean?
drive, force, or urge (someone) to do; drive forward; propel

What does ``impervious'' mean?
unable to be affected by

What does ``implore'' mean?
beg someone earnestly or desperately to do something

What does ``indelible'' mean?
not able to be forgotten or removed

What does ``inhume'' mean?
bury

What does ``inter'' mean?
place (a corpse) in a grave or tomb, typically with funeral rites

What does ``inveterate'' mean?
having a particular habit, activity, or interest that is long-established and unlikely to change

What does it mean for there to be a dearth of something?
scarcity or lack of it

What does it mean if someone is a philistine?
person who is hostile or indifferent to culture and the arts, or who has no understanding of them

What does it mean to abstract oneself?
to leave

What does it mean to abstract oneself?
to leave

What does it mean to assay?
to examine (something) to assess its nature; to attempt

What does it mean to be aproscopinous?
lacking the supraorbital ridge

What does it mean to be aproterodont?
having the intermaxillaries toothless

What does it mean to be shrewd?
having or showing sharp powers of judgment; astute

What does it mean to be steadfast?
be resolutely or dutifully firm and unwavering

What does it mean to broach?
veer and pitch a ship forward because of bad steering or a sea hitting the stern, causing it to present a side to the wind and sea, lose steerage, and possibly suffer serious damage

What does it mean to bungle?
carry out (a task) clumsily or incompetently

What does it mean to cachinnate?
laugh loudly

What does it mean to cantillate?
chant or intone a passage of religious text

What does it mean to confabulate?
converse

What does it mean to convalesce?
recover

What does it mean to gambol?
run or jump about playfully

What does it mean to geld?
castrate a male animal; deprive of vitality or vigour

What does it mean to gild something?
cover it thinly with gold

What does it mean to inoculate someone?
immunize against a disease by introducing infective material, microorganisms, or vaccine into the body

What does it mean to jibe with?
be in accord; agree

What does it mean to malinger?
exaggerate or feign illness to escape duty or work

What does it mean to prate?
talk foolishly or at tedious length about something

What does it mean to preponderate over something?
be greater in number, influence, or importance

What does it mean to retort?
say something in answer to a remark or accusation, typically in a sharp, angry, or wittily incisive manner

What does it mean to separate the wheat from the chaff?
distinguish valuable people or things from worthless ones

What does it mean to sully something?
damage the purity or integrity of; defile

What does it mean to traduce?
expose to shame or blame by means of falsehood and misrepresentation

What does ``menial'' mean?
(of work) not requiring much skill and lacking prestige

What does ``natiform'' mean?
resembling the buttocks

What does ``palatial'' mean?
resembling a palace in being spacious and splendid

What does ``paltry'' mean?
(of an amount) small or meager; petty; trivial

What does ``perfidious'' mean?
deceitful and untrustworthy

What does ``portly'' mean?
of a stately or dignified appearance and manner

What does ``posit'' mean?
assume as a fact; put forward as a basis of an argument

What does ``prostrate'' mean?
lying stretched out on the ground with one's face downward

What does ``salutary'' mean?
(especially with reference to something unwelcome or unpleasant) producing good effects; beneficial

What does ``sidle'' mean?
walk in a furtive, unobtrusive, or timid manner, especially sideways or obliquely

What does ``swill'' mean?
wash or rinse out (an area or container) by pouring large amounts of water or other liquid over or into it; drink (something) greedily or in large quantities

What does the adverb ``posthaste'' mean?
with great speed or immediacy

What does the British English ``minim'' mean in music?
half note

What does the British English ``semibreve'' mean in music?
whole note

What does the French ``cassis'' mean in English?
blackcurrant

What does the French ``cédez'' mean in music?
go slower

What does the French ``coulé'' mean in music?
slur

What does the French ``en dehors'' mean in music?
make prominent

What does the French ``filer la voix'' mean in music?
prolong a tone swelling and diminishing

What does the French ``lointain'' mean in music?
remote; distant

What does the French ``positif'' mean in music?
choir organ

What does the French ``près de la table'' mean in music?
play near the sounding board

What does the French ``ralentissez'' mean in music?
slow down

What does the French ``récit'' mean in music?
swell organ

What does the French ``revenez au mouv.'' mean in music?
return to the original tempo

What does the French ``sec'' mean in music?
dry

What does the French ``sourdine'' mean in music?
mute

What does the French ``tirasse'' mean in music?
coupled organ manuals

What does the German ``abdämpfen'' mean in music?
muted

What does the German ``abgemessen'' mean in music?
in strict time

What does the German ``abnehmend'' mean in music?
gradually softer

What does the German ``abschwellen'' mean in music?
gradually slower

What does the German ``achtel'' mean in music?
eighth note

What does the German ``allmählich'' mean in music?
gradually

What does the German ``andächtig'' mean in music?
with devotion

What does the German ``anfang'' mean in music?
beginning

What does the German ``anhang'' mean in music?
coda

What does the German ``anmutig'' mean in music?
grazioso

What does the German ``anwachsen'' mean in music?
gradually louder

What does the German ``aufgeregt'' mean in music?
agitated

What does the German ``ausdruck'' mean in music?
expression

What does the German ``ausdruckslos'' mean in music?
without expression

What does the German ``ausdrucksvoll'' mean in music?
with expression

What does the German ``ausgabe'' mean?
edition

What does the German ``bedeutungsvoll'' mean in music?
meaningfully

What does the German ``belebt'' mean in music?
lively

What does the German ``bestimmt'' mean in music?
with decision

What does the German ``betont'' mean in music?
accented

What does the German ``bewegt'' mean in music?
with motion

What does the German ``dämpfer'' mean in music?
mute

What does the German ``doppelt'' mean in music?
double; twice as fast

What does the German ``drängen'' mean in music?
pressing

What does the German ``dur'' mean in music?
major

What does the German ``eilen'' mean in music?
hurried

What does the German ``einfach'' mean in music?
simple

What does the German ``einleiten'' mean in music?
introduce

What does the German ``empfindung'' mean in music?
feeling

What does the German ``etwas'' mean?
some

What does the German ``feierlich'' mean in music?
ceremonial; solemn

What does the German ``fliessend'' mean in music?
flowing; smooth

What does the German ``flott'' mean in music?
smart; snappy

What does the German ``flüsternd'' mean in music?
susurrant

What does the German ``folgend'' mean in music?
following

What does the German ``fröhlich'' mean in music?
gay

What does the German ``früher'' mean in music?
earlier

What does the German ``ganz'' mean in music?
all

What does the German ``gebunden'' mean in music?
legato

What does the German ``gedehnt'' mean in music?
slow; stately; studied

What does the German ``gefühl'' mean in music?
feeling

What does the German ``gehalten'' mean in music?
sustained

What does the German ``gehend'' mean in music?
andante

What does the German ``gemächlich'' mean in music?
easy going

What does the German ``halbe'' mean in music?
half note

What does the German ``hauch'' mean in music?
breath

What does the German ``haupt'' mean in music?
head; main

What does the German ``heftig'' mean in music?
vehement

What does the German ``immer'' mean in music?
always

What does the German ``kurz'' mean in music?
short

What does the German ``langsam'' mean in music?
slow

What does the German ``lebhaft'' mean in music?
lively

What does the German ``leise'' mean in music?
soft

What does the German ``luft pause'' mean in music?
breath pause

What does the German ``lustig'' mean in music?
merry

What does the German ``mässig'' mean in music?
andante

What does the German ``moll'' mean in music?
minor

What does the German ``munter'' mean in music?
animato

What does the German ``nach gefallen'' mean in music?
ad libitum

What does the German ``nachlassend'' mean in music?
gradually slower

What does the German ``ohne'' mean in music?
without

What does the German ``rasch'' mean in music?
fast

What does the German ``ruhig'' mean in music?
calm

What does the German ``satz'' mean in music?
movement

What does the German ``schluss'' mean in music?
close cadence

What does the German ``schnell'' mean in music?
fast

What does the German ``steigern'' mean in music?
intensify; heighten

What does the German ``stimme'' mean in music?
voice

What does the German ``takt'' mean in music?
beat; pulse; measure

What does the German ``teil'' mean in music?
part

What does the German ``verlangsamen'' mean in music?
ritardando

What does the German ``viertel'' mean in music?
quarter note

What does the German ``vortrag'' mean in music?
performance

What does the German ``weich'' mean in music?
soft

What does the German ``wiederholen'' mean in music?
repeat

What does the German ``zeitmass'' mean in music?
tempo

What does the German ``zurückgehen'' mean in music?
return to a preceding tempo

What does the German ``zurückhalten'' mean in music?
hold back; ritardando

What does the Greek root ichthy-- mean?
fish; ἰχθύς (ichthus); ichthyology

What does the Greek root icos-- mean?
twenty; εἴκοσι (eikosi); icosagon, icosahedron

What does the Greek root id-- mean?
shape; εἶδος (eidos); idol

What does the Greek root ide-- mean?
idea; thought; ιδέα (idea); ideogram, ideology

What does the Greek root idi-- mean?
personal; ἴδιος (idios); idiom, idiosyncrasy, idiot

What does the Greek root kil(o)-- mean?
thousand; χίλιοι (chilioi); kilobyte, kilogram, kilometer

What does the Greek root kine-- mean?
movement, motion; κινέω (kineo); telekinesis, kinetic energy, kinesthetic

What does the Greek root klept-- mean?
steal; κλέπτης (kleptēs); kleptomania

What does the Greek root kudo-- mean?
glory; κῦδος (kudos); kudos

What does the Greek root lamp-- mean?
shine; λαμπάς lampas `torch'; lamp

What does the Greek root lei-- mean?
smooth; λείος leios; leiomyoma

What does the Greek root lekan-- mean?
dish, pot; λεκάνη lekane; lekane

What does the Greek root lep-- mean?
flake, scale; λέπις lepis; Lepidoptera

What does the Greek root leps-- mean?
grasp, seize; λήψης lepsis; epilepsy

What does the Greek root lip-- mean?
fat; λίπος lipos; lipolysis

What does the Greek root lith-- mean?
stone; λίθος (lithos); lithosphere, megalith, monolith, Neolithic Era

What does the Greek root log-- mean?
thought, word, speech; λόγος (logos) `word'; logic, monologue, morphological

What does the Greek root macro-- mean?
long; μακρός (makros); macron

What does the Greek root meg-- mean?
great, large; μέγας (megas); megaphone

What does the Greek root mei-- mean?
less; μεῖον (meiōn); meiosis

What does the Greek root melan-- mean?
black, dark; μέλας (melas); Melanesia, melanoma

What does the Greek root men-- mean?
month; μήν (mēn); menopause

What does the Greek root mening-- mean?
membrane; μήνιγξ (meninx); meningitis

What does the Greek root mer-- mean?
part; μέρος (meros); polymer

What does the Greek root mes-- mean?
middle; μέσος (mesos); mesolithic, mesozoic

What does the Greek root meta-- mean?
above, among, beyond; μετά (meta); metaphor, metaphysics

What does the Greek root micr-- mean?
small; μικρός (mikros); microphone, microscope

What does the Greek root mim-- mean?
repeat; μίμος (mimos); mime, mimic

What does the Greek root mis-- mean?
hate; μῖσος (misos); misandry, misogyny

What does the Greek root mit-- mean?
thread; μίτος (mitos); mitochondrion

What does the Greek root mne-- mean?
memory; μνήμη (mnēmē); mnemonic

What does the Greek root mon-- mean?
one; μόνος (monos); monism, monolith, monotone

What does the Greek root morph-- mean?
form, shape; μορφή (morphē); anthropomorphism, morpheme, morphology

What does the Greek root my-- mean?
mouse; μῦς (mus); musophobia

What does the Greek root myri-- mean?
countless, ten thousand; μυρίος (murios); myriad, myriapod

What does the Greek root myrmec-- mean?
ant; μύρμηξ (murmēx); myrmecoid, Myrmidons

What does the Greek root myth-- mean?
story; μῦθος (muthos); mythic, mythology

What does the Greek root myx-- mean?
slime; μύξα (muxa); Myxini

What does the Greek root myz-- mean?
suck; μυζάω (muzaō); Myzopoda

What does the Italian ``al loco'' mean in music?
at the written pitch

What does the Italian ``alla breve'' mean in music?
half note as the beat

What does the Italian ``assai'' mean in music?
very (much)

What does the Italian ``attacca'' mean in music?
play what follows without pause

What does the Italian ``calando'' mean in music?
gradually softer

What does the Italian ``cantabile'' mean in music?
songlike; singingly

What does the Italian ``col legno'' mean in music?
with the wood

What does the Italian ``comodo'' mean in music?
easily; leisurely

What does the Italian ``con fuoco'' mean in music?
with fire

What does the Italian ``con moto'' mean in music?
with movement

What does the Italian ``dolorosamente'' mean in music?
sadly; grievingly

What does the Italian ``doppio movimento'' mean in music?
twice as fast

What does the Italian ``fastoso'' mean in music?
pompous; stately

What does the Italian ``ma non troppo'' mean in music?
but not too much

What does the Italian ``maestoso'' mean in music?
majestic

What does the Italian ``piangevole'' mean in music?
mournfully

What does the Italian ``rallentando'' mean in music?
gradually slower

What does the Italian ``rinforzando'' mean in music?
sudden crescendo

What does the Italian ``sempre'' mean in music?
always

What does the Italian ``senza'' mean in music?
without

What does the Italian ``sforzando'' mean in music?
with accent

What does the Italian ``smorzando'' mean in music?
dying away

What does the Italian ``sordino'' mean in music?
mute

What does the Italian ``sotto'' mean in music?
under; beneath

What does the Italian ``subito'' mean in music?
suddenly

What does the Italian ``tacet'' mean in music?
silent

What does the Italian ``troppo'' mean in music?
too much

What does the Italian ``ugualmente'' mean in music?
evenly; smoothly

What does the Latin root ign-- mean?
fire; ignis; igneous, ignition

What does the Latin root infra-- mean?
below, under; infra; infrastructure

What does the Latin root insul-- mean?
island; insula; insular, insulation

What does the Latin root inter-- mean?
among, between; inter (preposition); intercollegiate, intermission, intersection

What does the Latin root intra-- mean?
within; intra; intramural

What does the Latin root iter-- mean?
again; iterum, iterare; iteration

What does the Latin root jac-- mean?
lie; jacēre `to be thrown'; adjacent

What does the Latin root janu-- mean?
door; janua; janitor

What does the Latin root joc-- mean?
joke; jocus; jocularity

What does the Latin root jug-- mean?
yoke; jugare, jugum; conjugal, subjugate

What does the Latin root junior-- mean?
younger; junior; juniority

What does the Latin root juven-- mean?
young, youth; juvenis; juvenile, rejuvenate

What does the Latin root juxta-- mean?
beside, near; juxta; juxtaposition

What does the Latin root labi-- mean?
lip; labia, labiae; bilabial, labial

What does the Latin root labor-- mean?
toil; labor; collaboration, elaboration

What does the Latin root lacer-- mean?
tear; lacer; laceration

What does the Latin root lacrim-- mean?
cry, tears; lacrima `tear'; lacrimal, lacrimous

What does the Latin root lact-- mean?
milk; lac, lactis, lactare; lactate, lactation, lactose

What does the Latin root lamin-- mean?
layer, slice; lamina; laminate, lamination

What does the Latin root lapid-- mean?
stone; lapis, lapidis; lapidary

What does the Latin root larg-- mean?
large; largus; enlargement

What does the Latin root larv-- mean?
ghost, mask; larva; larva, larvae, larval

What does the Latin root lat-- mean?
broad, wide; latus; latitude

What does the Latin root later-- mean?
side; latus, lateris; bilateral

What does the Latin root lav-- mean?
wash; lavare; lavatory

What does the Latin root lax-- mean?
not tense; laxus, laxare; laxative, relaxation

What does the Latin root leg-- mean?
law; lex, legis, legare; legal, legislative

What does the Latin root leg-- mean?
send; legare; relegate

What does the Latin root leni-- mean?
gentle; lenis, lenire; leniency

What does the Latin root leon-- mean?
lion; leo, leonis; Leo, leonine, Leopold

What does the Latin root lev-- mean?
lift, light; levis `light' (in weight), levare; elevator, levitation

What does the Latin root liber-- mean?
free; liber, liberare; liberation, liberty

What does the Latin root libr-- mean?
book; liber, libri; librarian, library

What does the Latin root lig-- mean?
bind; ligare, ligatus; ligament, ligature

What does the Latin root limac-- mean?
slug; limax, limacis; limacoid, limacon

What does the Latin root lin-- mean?
line; linea; line, linearity

What does the Latin root lingu-- mean?
language, tongue; lingua; bilingual, linguistic

What does the Latin root liter-- mean?
letter; littera; alliteration, illiterate, literacy, literal, obliterate

What does the Latin root loc-- mean?
place; locus; local, location

What does the Latin root long-- mean?
long; longus; elongate, longitude

What does the Latin root luc-- mean?
bright, light; lux, lucis light; Lucifer (bearer of light)

What does the Latin root lumin-- mean?
light; lumen, luminis; illumination, luminous

What does the Latin root lun-- mean?
moon; luna; lunar, lunatic; lysis; dissolving; Greek; λύσις (lusis); analysis, cytolysis, hydrolysis

What does the Latin root magn-- mean?
great, large; magnus; magnanimous, magnificent, magnitude

What does the Latin root maj-- mean?
greater; major, majus; majesty, majority, majuscule

What does the Latin root mal-- mean?
bad, wretched,; malus; malfeasance, malicious, malignancy, malodorous

What does the Latin root mamm-- mean?
breast; mamma; mammal, mammary gland

What does the Latin root man-- mean?
flow; mānāre, manatus; emanate, emanationism, immanant, immanation

What does the Latin root man-- mean?
stay; manēre, mansus; immanence, immanent, manse, permanence, permanent, remanence, remanent

What does the Latin root mand-- mean?
hand; mandāre, mandatus; mandate, remand; mania; mental illness; Greek; μανία (manίā); kleptomania, maniac

What does the Latin root manu-- mean?
hand; manus; manual, manuscript

What does the Latin root mar-- mean?
sea; mare, maris; marine, maritime

What does the Latin root maxim-- mean?
greatest; maximus; maximum

What does the Latin root melior-- mean?
better; melior; amelioration

What does the Latin root mell-- mean?
honey; mel, mellis; mellifluous

What does the Latin root memor-- mean?
remember; memor; memorial

What does the Latin root menstru-- mean?
monthly; menstruus; menstruation, menstrual

What does the Latin root mensur-- mean?
measure; mensura; commensurate

What does the Latin root ment-- mean?
mind; mens, mentis; demented, mentality

What does the Latin root merc-- mean?
reward, wages, hire; merx, mercis; mercantile, merchant

What does the Latin root mic-- mean?
grain; mica; micelle

What does the Latin root migr-- mean?
wander; migrare; emigrant, migrate

What does the Latin root milit-- mean?
soldier; miles, militis; military, militia

What does the Latin root mill-- mean?
thousand; mille; millennium, million

What does the Latin root millen-- mean?
thousand each; milleni; millenary

What does the Latin root min-- mean?
jut; minere; prominent

What does the Latin root min-- mean?
less, smaller; minor, minus; minority, minuscule

What does the Latin root mir-- mean?
wonder, amazement; miror, mirari, miratus sum; admire, miracle, mirror

What does the Latin root mol-- mean?
grind; mola, molere, molitus; molar

What does the Latin root moll-- mean?
soft; mollis; emollient, mollify

What does the Latin root monil-- mean?
string of beads; monile; Moniliformida

What does the Latin root mont-- mean?
mountain; mons, montis; Montana

What does the Latin root mord-- mean?
bite; mordere, morsus; mordacious, morsel, remorse

What does the Latin root mort-- mean?
death; mors, mortis; immortal, mortality, mortuary

What does the Latin root mult-- mean?
many, much; multus; multiple, multiplex, multitude

What does the Latin root mur-- mean?
wall; murus, muri; immured, mural

What does the Latin root mus-- mean?
thief; mus, muris; mouse

What does the Latin root musc-- mean?
fly; musca, muscae; Muscicapidae, Muscidae

What does the Latin root mut-- mean?
change; mutare; mutation

What does the Hardy--Ramanujan theorem state?
the normal order of $\omega(n)$ is $\log\log n$

What is my first name?
Jack

What does the Ovidian phrase ``ut ameris, amabilis esto'' mean?
if you want to be loved, be lovable

What does the verb ``spurn'' mean?
reject with disdain or contempt

What does ``transgress'' mean?
infringe or go beyond the bounds of (a moral principle or other established standard of behaviour)

What does ``undergird'' mean?
provide support or a firm basis for; secure or fasten from the underside, especially by a rope or chain passed underneath

What does ``unscrupulous'' mean?
having or showing no moral principles; not honest or fair

What dog, its name derived from the Russian for ``swift,'' is a large Russian wolfhound of a breed with a narrow head and silky, typically white, coat?
borzoi

What drug (C11H16N2) has stimulant and euphoric properties similar to those of amphetamine?
benzylpiperazine

What drug with the chemical formula C10H22N4 is used in the form of its sulphate to treat hypertension?
guanethidine

What dry one-seeded fruit in which the ovary wall is united with the seed coat is typical of grasses and cereals?
caryopsis

What dry red wine, originally produced in Tuscany, is named after an Italian mountain range?
Chianti

What dynasty ruled France from 987 to 1328?
Capetian

What eastern German city was formerly known as Karl-Marx-Stadt?
Chemnitz

What eastern province of the ancient Persian Empire and district now in northwestern Afghanistan and eastern Iran shares its name with a type of melodic solo for voice?
Aria

What economic association of eastern European countries founded in 1949 and analogous to the European Economic Community was dissolved in 1991 with the collapse of communism in eastern Europe?
Comecon

What effect involves a mass moving in a rotating system experiencing a force acting perpendicular to the direction of motion and to the axis of rotation?
Coriolis effect

What Egyptian concept referred to truth and wisdom but more broadly referred to order as opposed to chaos?
ma'at

What Egyptian pharaoh of the fourth dynasty (Khufu) commissioned the building of the Great Pyramid at Giza?
Cheops

What Egyptian served as secretary-general of the United Nations from 1992 to 1997?
Boutros Boutros-Ghali

What eighth pair of cranial nerves conveys sensory impulses from the organs of hearing and balance in the inner ear to the brain?
vestibulocochlear nerve

What elongated axis raises the stem of the pistil above the stamens?
carpophore

What embryonic leaf in seed-bearing plants is the first leaf to appear from a germinating seed?
cotyledon

What English actor, producer, and director is known for such Shakespearean films as Much ado about nothing (1993), Hamlet (1996), and Love's labour's lost (2000)?
Kenneth Branagh

What English adjective comes from the French for ``heretofore''?
ci-devant

What English businessman and adventurer established Virgin Records in 1969 and Virgin Atlantic Airways in 1984, made the fastest transatlantic crossing by boat in 1986, and the first by hot-air balloon in 1987?
Richard Branson

What English prelate and statesman incurred royal displeasure through his failure to secure the papal dispensation necessary for Henry VIII's divorce from Catherine of Aragon, was arrested on a charge of treason, died on his way to trial?
Thomas Wolsey

What envelope of thin pastry whose name is of Turkish origin is filled with cheese, spinach, or ground meat and baked or fried?
borek

What enzyme catalyzes the interconversion of dissolved bicarbonates and carbon dioxide?
carbonic anhydrase

What enzyme catalyzes the reduction of hydrogen peroxide?
catalase

What enzyme converts cellulose into glucose or a disaccharide?
cellulase

What enzyme is required for the formation of prostaglandins and blocked by painkillers such as aspirin and ibuprofen?
cyclooxygenase

What Estonian word means ``golden tongue''?
kuldsuu

What exclave of Angola at the mouth of the Congo River is separated from the rest of Angola by a wedge of the Democratic Republic of Congo?
Cabinda

What extra personal name was given to an ancient Roman citizen, functioning rather like a nickname and typically passed down from father to son?
cognomen

What f-word refers to a woman capable of becoming pregnant and giving birth or, more generally, something fertile?
fecund

What family comprises marine fish, jacks, typically with a sloping forehead and two dorsal fins?
Carangidae

What family comprises the leaf beetles and their relatives?
Chrysomelidae

What family comprises the marmosets and tamarins?
Callitrichidae

What family comprises the predatory ground beetles?
Carabidae

What family is known as ``the pink family'' or ``the carnation family''?
Caryophyllaceae

What family of beetles includes the ladybugs?
Coccinellidae

What family of Dutch painters active from 1581 to 1712 included Bonaventure and Abraham, who managed the firm in its prime?
Elzevir

What family of Dutch painters active from 1581 to 1712 included Bonaventure and Abraham, who managed the firm in its prime?
Elzevir

What family of freshwater fish is widely distributed in tropical countries, providing a valuable source of food in some areas?
Cichlidae

What family of homopteran insects comprises scale insects?
Coccidae

What family of widely distributed shrubs and trees (order Sapindales) is characterized by alternate simple often evergreen leaves, small dioecious flowers usually in axillary clusters, and berrylike drupes?
Aquifoliaceae

What fatal degenerative disease affecting nerve cells in the brain, causing mental, physical, and sensory disturbances such as dementia and seizures, is believed to be caused by prions and hence to be related to BSE and other spongiform encephalopathies such as kuru and scrapie?
Creutzfeldt--Jakob disease

What Fate's name comes from the Greek for ``she who spins''?
Clotho

What female reproductive organ of a flower consists of an ovary, a stigma, and usually a style?
carpel

What fertile black soil rich in humus, with a lighter lime-rich layer beneath, typically occurs in temperate grasslands such as the Russian steppes and North American prairies?
chernozem

What fibrous substance consists of polysaccharides and forms the major constituent in the exoskeleton of arthropods and the cell walls of fungi?
chitin

What figure of Greek myth---the wife of Cepheus, king of Ethiopia, and mother of Andromeda --- is the eponym for a constellation near the north celestial pole, recognizable by the conspicuous ``W'' pattern of its brightest stars?
Cassiopeia

What figure of Greek mythos was the king of Ethiopia, husband of Cassiopeia, and father of Andromeda?
Cepheus

What first secretion from the mammary glands after giving birth is rich in antibodies?
colostrum

What flat surface forms the stern of a boat?
transom

What flattened triangular projection above the angle of the jaw where the temporalis muscle is attached shares its name with a projection from the front of the ulna forming part of the articulation of the elbow?
coronoid process

What fluid-filled canal runs through the midbrain connecting the third and fourth ventricles?
cerebral aqueduct

What folk religion practiced in South America (especially Brazil) is based on traditional African religious practices modified by elements of Roman Catholicism and spiritualism?
candomblé

What followers of a strictly orthodox Jewish sect in Palestine in the third and second centuries BC opposed Hellenizing influences on their faith and supported the Maccabean revolt?
Hasidim

What food-gathering, cave-dwelling Mesolithic culture of ancient Palestine was characterized by microliths, composite tools of microliths, small bare zoomorphic carvings in bone or stone, and the use of sickles suggesting some agriculture?
Natufian culture

What form of carbon has molecules of sixty atoms arranged in a polyhedron resembling a geodesic sphere?
buckminsterfullerene

What form of necrosis characteristic of tuberculosis involves diseased tissue forming a firm, dry mass like cheese in appearance?
caseation

What form of the mineral andalusite contains carbonaceous inclusions that cause some sections of the mineral to show the figure of a cross?
chiastolite

What formal term for a conversation more commonly refers to a gathering for discussion of theological questions?
colloquy

What formal term from the Greek for ``to praise'' refers to a person who publicly praises or flatters someone else?
encomiast

What formal term is ascribed to a selection of passages from an author or authors designed to help in learning a language?
chrestomathy

What formal term means to prove a person or an assertion to be wrong?
confute

What formal term means to walk all the way around something?
circumambulate

What formal term, from the Latin for ``dinner,'' is given to a group of people, such as a discussion group or literary clique?
cenacle

What formal verb means to think deeply about something, meditate, or reflect?
cogitate

What formal word from the Latin ``through'' + ``speak'' means ``speak at length''?
perorate

What formal word from the Latin for ``restrain, answer conclusively'' means to prove a person or an assertion wrong?
confute

What former duchy and province in central France has its chief town in Moulins?
Bourbonnais

What former duchy in western Europe, the capital of which was Brussels, is now divided into two provinces: one in the Netherlands, of which the capital is `s-Hertogenbosch, and another in Belgium, of which the capital remains Brussels?
Brabant

What former homeland was established in South Africa for the Tswana people?
Bophuthatswana

What fourth ecumenical council of the Christian Church, held in 451, condemned the Monophysite position and affirmed the dual but united nature of Christ as god and man?
Council of Chalcedon

What fourth of eight standard parrying positions in fencing has the blade up and to the inside, wrist supinated?
quarte

What fowl's name is used for a batsman's dismissal with a score of zero in cricket?
duck

What fracture of the lower end of the radius in the wrist is characterized by a backward hand displacement?
Colles fracture

What French adjective means ``served with a sauce of red wine and onions''?
bordelaise

What French couturier was the first designer of haute couture to show a collection of clothes for men and women?
Pierre Cardin

What French dish consists of sauerkraut flavoured with juniper and served with assorted meats?
choucroute garni

What French game is a form of lawn bowling on rough ground and using a metal ball?
boules

What French name is given to a long Turkish tobacco pipe?
chibouk

What French national theatre used for both comedy and tragedy in Paris was founded in 1680 by Louis XIV?
Comédie-Française

What French poet's courtly romances on Arthurian themes include Lancelot (c. 1177--81) and Perceval (c. 1181--90, unfinished)?
Chrétien de Troyes

What French term for a formal report or review shares its name with a document published in February 1781 by Jacques Necker?
compte rendu

What French term meaning ``stroke of eye'' refers to a glance that takes in a comprehensive view?
coup d'œil

What French term meaning ``stroke of lightning'' refers to a sudden unforeseen event, in particular an instance of love at first sight?
coup de foudre

What French term of footwear is used to change the subject?
à propos de bottes

What French term refers to a final blow or shot given to kill a wounded person or animal?
coup de grâce

What French type of blood sausage shares its name with a spicy sausage used especially in Louisiana cuisine?
boudin

What French word meaning ``running'' refers to a sixteenth-century court dance consisting of short advances and retreats?
courante

What French word refers to a fabric with an irregularly raised or embossed surface?
cloqué

What French word that denoted a bundle of papers with a label on the back now means a collection of documents about a particular person, event, or subject?
dossier

What French-derived term refers to a group of sycophantic followers or people hired to applaud (or heckle) a performer or public speaker?
claque

What French-derived term refers to a small stream or a lava flow?
coulee

What French-derived word is given to an enlarged part of a nerve fibre or cell, especially an axon, where it forms a synapse with another nerve?
bouton

What fungicide for vines, fruit trees, and other plants is composed of equal quantities of copper sulphate and calcium oxide in water and named after a region in France?
Bordeaux mixture

What genus of Asian trees (family Thymelaeaceae) has lanceolate leaves and nearly sessile umbels of flowers?
Aquilaria

What geographical term, which is also a name for Qaanaaq and a word for the culture existing in the arctic lands from Alaska to Greenland from about 500 to 1400, was a country described by Pytheas as being six days' sail north of Britain, most plausibly identified with Norway, and regarded by the ancients as the northernmost part of the world?
Thule

What geologic formation or stratum confines water in an adjacent aquifer?
aquiclude

What geologic formation or stratum that lies adjacent to an aquifer allows only a small amount of liquid to pass?
aquitard

What German Nazi politician, whose skeleton, exhumed in Berlin, was identified in 1973 after disappearing at the end of World War II, was considered Hitler's closest collaborator?
Martin Bormann

What German state surrounds Berlin?
Brandenburg

(feast day: 6 October) What German-born French churchman and saint founded the Carthusian order at La Grande Chartreuse in 1084?
St. Bruno

What Germanized word is given to brass, tortoiseshell, or another material that is cut to make a pattern and used for inlaying furniture?
buhl

What glandular sac opening into the cloaca of a bird produces B cells?
bursa of Fabricius

What gliding step in dancing involves one foot displacing the other?
chassé

What glycosaminoglycan and constituent of cartilage and other connective tissue occurs mainly in the form of sulphate esters?
chondroitin

What gnostic term refers to the spiritual universe as the abode of God and the totality of the divine powers and emanations?
pleroma

What Gram-positive, anaerobic, toxin-producing bacterium can infect the bowel, causing illness with diarrhea and fever, especially in people who have been treated with antibiotics?
Clostridium difficile

What grammatical term denotes a word or phrase that refers to or stands for a later word or phrase?
cataphora

What Greek and Roman Muse of epic poetry shares its name with a keyboard instrument resembling an organ but with the notes produced by steam whistles, used chiefly on showboats and in travelling fairs?
Calliope

What Greek architect was the leading architect in Periclean Athens and designed the Parthenon with Ictinus (447--38 BC)?
Callicrates

What Greek mythological figure was a fire-breathing female monster with a lion's head, a goat's body, and a serpent's tail, and shares its name with an organism containing a mixture of genetically different tissues, formed by processes such as fusion of early embryos, grafting, or mutation?
Chimera

What Greek phrase meaning ``mystical marriage'' refers to a sacred marriage that plays out between a god and a goddess, especially when enacted in a symbolic ritual where human participants represent the deities?
hieros gamos

What Greek poet and scholar wrote hymns and epigrams and was head of the library at Alexandria?
Callimachus

What gregarious piglike mammal is found from the south-western United States to Paraguay?
peccary

What group of fifteen islands in the southwestern Pacific Ocean between Tonga and French Polynesia has the status of a self-governing territory in free association with New Zealand and has its capital in Avarua?
Cook Islands

What group of islands in the western Pacific Ocean, north of the equator, is divided between the Federated States of Micronesia and Palau?
Caroline Islands

What group of mountains near the Mediterranean coast in northwestern Israel, sheltering the port of Haifa, was the scene of the defeat of the priests of Baal by the prophet Elijah (1 Kings 18)?
Mount Carmel

What group of seven small islands in the western Philippines is located in the Sulu Sea?
Cagayan Islands

What group of small bones between the main part of the forelimb and the metacarpus in terrestrial vertebrates forms the wrist in humans?
carpus

What gulf in the Canadian Arctic Ocean in the Northwest Territories is located between a peninsula of the same name and Baffin Island?
Gulf of Boothia

What hardness test involves hydraulically pressing a steel ball into the metal and measuring the resulting indentation?
Brinell hardness test

What heraldic adjective describes something that is divided into a single row of squares in alternating tincture?
compony

What heraldic name is given to an ordinary in the form of a broad inverted V-shape?
chevron

What heraldic name is given to arms containing an allusion to the name of the bearer?
canting arms

What heraldic term is given to a square charge smaller than a quarter and positioned in the upper (usually dexter) corner of a shield?
canton

What heraldic term refers to a stag, bull, or other figure shown full face with no neck?
caboshed

What heraldic term refers to the status of a younger branch of a family?
cadency

What heraldic verb means to interchange the tinctures of a charge with that of a divided field?
counterchange

What hill in the Charlestown section of northern Boston in Massachusetts gave its name to the first pitched battle (1775) of the American Revolution, which was actually fought on nearby Breed's Hill, and considerable impetus to the Revolution despite the British victory?
Bunker Hill

What Hindu-postulated cycle comprises 12,000 years, ending with a dissolution (a pralaya) which is repeated more drastically at the end of the thousandth cycle, and repeats 360 times to form one cosmic period of 4,320,000 years?
mahayuga

What historic commune that existed in the 1840s in West Roxbury and is now a southwestern section of Boston in Massachusetts was associated with Margaret Fuller and other writers?
Brook Farm

What historic port city in northern Haiti was the country's former capital of Haiti and is the second-largest city in the country?
Cap-Haïtien

What historic stream in southeastern Pennsylvania and northern Delaware is the birthplace of the American gunpowder industry?
Brandywine Creek

What historical or humourous term of French origin refers to a woman's bedroom or private room?
boudoir

What holy city of Islam in Tunisia was founded by the Umayyads around 670 and is the site of the Mosque of Uqba?
Kairouan

What hormone abbreviated ``CCK'' secreted by duodenal cells stimulates the release of bile into the intestine and the secretion of enzymes by the pancreas?
cholecystokinin

What hormone that cells in the duodenum secrete stimulates the release of bile into the intestine and the secretion of enzymes by the pancreas?
cholecystokinin

What hormone released in the blood in some circumstances causes smooth muscle contraction and blood vessel dilation and is a peptide comprising nine amino-acid residues?
bradykinin

What hormone secreted during pregnancy by the placenta stimulates the continued production of progesterone by the ovaries?
chorionic gonadotropin

What hormone-secreting structure develops after an ovum has been discharged but degenerates after a few days unless pregnancy has begun?
corpus luteum

What huge bronze statue of the sun god Helios was built circa 292--280 BC?
Colossus of Rhodes

What humorous term refers to the resort area in the Catskill Mountains frequented chiefly by Jewish guests?
Borscht Belt

What hydroelectric dam was built in the 1930s on the Columbia River east of Portland?
Bonneville Dam

What hydroelectric dam was built in the 1930s on the Columbia River east of Portland?
Bonneville Dam

What hydrometer scale named after a German scientist is used for measuring the amount of sugar in a solution at a given temperature?
Brix scale

What illuminated manuscript of the Gospels, perhaps made by Irish monks in Iona in the eighth or early ninth century, is now kept at Trinity College, Dublin?
Book of Kells

What illuminated manuscript of the Gospels, perhaps made by Irish monks in Iona in the eighth or early ninth century, is now kept at Trinity College, Dublin?
Book of Kells

What industrial city at the centre of Massif Central is the capital of the Auvergne region and was home to Blaise Pascal?
Clermont-Ferrand

What influential mystical Jewish movement, founded in Poland in the eighteenth century in reaction to the rigid academicism of rabbinical Judaism, declined sharply in the nineteenth century?
Hasidism

What informal instrumental composition, whose name comes from the German for ``serenade,'' is similar to a divertimento and often for outdoor performance?
cassation

What informal term is used to describe a person from Puerto Rico by birth or descent?
Boricua

What inlet of the Arabian Sea on the Gujarat coast of western India is north of Mumbai?
Gulf of Cambay/Khambhat

What inlet of the South China Sea in south-central Vietnam has been a major base for France, Japan, the former Soviet Union, and the US, which had a major installation here during the Vietnam War?
Cam Ranh Bay

What inlet of the Tasman Sea just south of Sydney, Australia was the site of Captain James Cook's landing in 1770 and of an early British penal settlement?
Botany Bay

What instrument is used for measuring the angle of elevation of slopes?
clinometer

What instrument of punishment for a scolding woman consisted of an iron framework for the head and a sharp metal gag for restraining the tongue?
branks

What international conference held from 1814 to 1815 to agree on the settlement of Europe after the Napoleonic Wars had the restoration and strengthening of hereditary and sometimes despotic rulers as its guiding principle and resulted in three to four decades of political stability?
Congress of Vienna

What Irish rebel assumed the name ``Mortimer'' and led the Kentish rebels against Henry VI, who occupied London for three days and executed the treasurer of England and the sheriff of Kent in 1450?
Jack Cade

What is a beggar or a vagrant called in France?
clochard

What is a billfold?
wallet, typically made of leather, especially a thin one with few compartments

What is a Black Maria?
police vehicle for transporting prisoners

What is a bon mot?
witty remark

What is a bon mot?
witty remark

What is a boor?
unrefined, ill-mannered person

What is a bordello?
brothel

What is a bouleversement?
violent disturbance; a reversal

What is a boutade?
sudden outburst or outbreak

What is a boutonnière?
spray of flowers worn in a buttonhole

What is a bouzouki?
long-necked Greek instrument similar to the mandolin

What is a bract?
modified leaf or scale, typically small, with a flower or flower cluster in its axil, and sometimes larger and more brightly coloured than the true flower, as in poinsettia

What is a brassard?
band worn on the sleeve, typically having an identifying mark and worn with a uniform

What is a bricolage?
construction or creation from a diverse range of available things in art or literature

What is a bridgehead?
strong position secured by an army inside enemy territory from which to advance or attack

What is a brigand?
member of a gang that ambushes and robs people in forests and mountains

What is a brigantine?
two-masted sailing ship with a square-rigged foremast and a fore-and-aft-rigged mainmast

What is a brogan?
coarse stout leather shoe reaching to the ankle

What is a burlesque?
absurd or comically exaggerated imitation of something, especially in a literary or dramatic work

What is a cabochon?
gem polished but not faceted

What is a cachalot?
sperm whale

What is a cacodemon?
malevolent spirit or person

What is a cacoëthes?
insatiable desire

What is a cadaver?
corpse

What is a cafard?
depression, melancholia

What is a canaliculus?
small channel or duct

What is a cantilever?
long projecting beam or girder fixed at only one end, used in bridge construction

What is a canto?
section of a long poem

What is a canzone?
Italian or Provençal song or ballad, type of lyric resembling a madrigal

What is a carabao?
water buffalo

What is a carafe?
open-topped glass flask typically used for serving wine or water

What is a carapace?
hard upper shell of a turtle, crustacean, or arachnid

What is a carrefour?
crossroads

What is a casserole of chicken pieces cooked in red wine called?
coq au vin

What is a catalogue raisonné?
descriptive catalogue of works of art with explanations and scholarly comments

What is a catchment area?
area from which rainfall flows into a river, lake, or reservoir

What is a cavalcade?
formal procession of people walking, on horseback, or riding in vehicles

What is a cenobium?
monastery

What is a chef-d'œuvre?
masterpiece

What is a cigar with both ends open and untapered called?
cheroot

What is a clear soup made with a concentrated stock called?
consommé

What is a cleg?
horsefly

What is a colonnade?
row of columns supporting a roof, an entablature, or arcade; a row of trees or other tall objects

What is a combination of a charmed quark and antiquark called?
charmonium

What is a communiqué?
official announcement or statement, especially one made to the media

What is a congenital split in the roof of the mouth called?
cleft palate

What is a consonant sounded with the vocal tract only partly closed, allowing the breath to pass through and the sound to be prolonged called?
continuant

What is a cooked breast of chicken in a cream sauce with mushrooms and peppers called?
chicken à la king

What is a coquette?
woman who flirts

What is a courser, in the literary sense?
swift horse

What is a crime boss's adviser called, as popularized in The Godfather?
consigliere

What is a cudgel?
short, thick stick used as a weapon

What is a dacha?
country house or cottage in Russia, typically used as a second or vacation home

What is a demagogue?
political leader who seeks support by appealing to the desires and prejudices of ordinary people rather than by using rational argument

What is a dotard?
old person, especially one who has become physically weak or whose mental faculties have declined

What is a flower cluster whose lower stalks are proportionally longer so that the flowers form a flat or slightly convex head called?
corymb

What is a follower and student of a guru called, commonly translated as ``disciple''?
chela

What is a glower?
angry or sullen look on one's face; a scowl

What is a golem?
in Jewish legend: a clay figure brought to life by magic

What is a group of cats called?
clowder

What is a hillock?
small hill or mound

What is a lathe?
machine for shaping wood, metal, or other material using a rotating drive which turns the piece being worked on against changeable cutting tools

What is a leading dancer in a corps de ballet called?
coryphée

What is a member of the clergy who officiates jointly at a Christian Mass called?
concelebrant

What is a metrical line of verse called if it lacks a syllable in the last foot?
catalectic

What is a milieu?
person's social environment

What is a narrow band adjacent and parallel to an ordinary such as a bend or chevron called in heraldry?
cottise

What is a paraenesis?
exhortatory composition

What is a peddler of books, newspapers, and similar literature called?
colporteur

What is a person who arranges type for printing or keys text into a composing machine called?
compositor

What is a persona non grata?
unacceptable or unwelcome person

What is a portiere?
curtain hung over a door or doorway

What is a premonition?
strong feeling that something is about to happen, especially something unpleasant

What is a promontory?
point of high land that juts out into a large body of water

What is a reactionary?
person whose views oppose political or social liberalization or reform

What is a representation in stone of a basket of flowers called?
corbeil

What is a reveille?
signal sounded especially on a bugle or drum to wake personnel in the armed forces

What is a rhyming couplet with end-stopped lines that is logically or grammatically complete called?
closed couplet

What is a rivulet?
very small stream

What is a road cut into the edge of a cliff, especially one running along a coast, called?
corniche

What is a road made of tree trunks laid across a swamp called?
corduroy road

What is a saboteur?
person who engages in sabotage

What is a sabre?
heavy cavalry sword with a curved blade and a single cutting edge

What is a scabbard?
sheath for the blade of a sword or dagger, typically made of leather or metal

What is a section of a DNA or RNA molecule that codes for a specific polypeptide in protein synthesis called?
cistron

What is a sepulchre?
small room or monument, cut in rock or built of stone, in which a dead person is laid or buried

What is a ship whose sails are hauled aft to sail close to the wind called?
close-hauled

What is a small, usually painless lump on the edge of the eyelid caused by blockage of the gland at the base of an eyelash called?
chalazion

What is a spherical bacterium called?
coccus

What is a syllogism?
instance of a form of reasoning in which a conclusion is drawn (whether validly or not) from two given or assumed propositions (premises), each of which shares a term with the conclusion and shares a common or middle term not present in the conclusion (e.g., all dogs are animals; all animals have four legs; therefore all dogs have four legs)

What is a woody plant whose resting buds are on or near the ground called?
chamaephyte

What is an afferent signal?
incoming signal

What is an arisaid?
full robe or skirt of tartan gathered and girdled at the waist

What is an aristarch?
severe critic

What is an elegiac couplet?
two dactylic hexameter lines, the second of which lacks the arsis in the third and sixth feet

What is an emissary?
person sent on a special mission, usually as a diplomatic representative

What is an encroachment?
intrusion on a person's territory, rights, etc.

What is an endowment for a priest or priests to celebrate masses for the founder's soul called?
chantry

What is an illegal agreement in which a person with no previous interest in a lawsuit finances it with a view to sharing the disputed property if the suit succeeds called?
champerty

What is an imp?
small, mischievous devil or sprite; a mischievous child

What is an incursion?
invasion or attack, especially a sudden or brief one

What is an intimation?
indication or hint

What is an organism, typically a bacterium, which derives energy from the oxidation of inorganic compounds called?
chemoautotroph

What is an undercroft?
the crypt of a church

What is an unstressed word that normally occurs only in combination with another word called?
clitic

What is another name for a bruise?
contusion

What is another name for a bullfight?
corrida

What is another name for climbing euonymus?
winter creeper

What is another name for pinkeye?
conjunctivitis

What is another term for a constructed language?
conlang

What is another term for loan translation?
calque

What is another term for mercuric chloride?
corrosive sublimate

What is another term for pollen basket?
corbicula

What is another term for stringcourse?
cordon

What is another term for?
coenzyme Q

What is atavism?
tendency to revert to something ancient or ancestral

What is boskage?
massed trees or shrubs

What is bouillon?
broth made by stewing meat, fish, or vegetables in water

What is bourbon?
straight whiskey distilled from a mash having at least fifty-one percent corn in addition to malt and rye

What is brio?
vigour or vivacity of style or performance

What is bris?
Jewish ceremony of circumcision

What is brisling?
sprat, typically one seasoned and smoked in Norway and sold in a can

What is brunoise?
finely diced vegetables that are cooked in butter and used to flavour soups and sauces

What is brusquerie?
abruptness or bluntness of manner

What is bucatini?
pasta in the shape of small tubes

What is cachexia?
weakness and wasting of the body due to severe chronic illness

What is calenture?
feverish delirium supposedly caused by the heat in the tropics

What is calumny?
the making of false and defamatory statements about someone in order to damage their reputation; slander

What is camber?
the slightly convex or arched shape of a road or other horizontal surface

What is cardialgia?
heartburn, cardiodynia

What is cardiodynia?
pain in the region of the heart

What is carmine?
vivid crimson colour

What is carphology?
plucking at the bedclothes by a delirious patient

What is Cascade Range's highest peak?
Mount Rainier

What is caustic potash?
potassium hydroxide

What is caustic soda?
sodium hydroxide

What is Charles's Wain?
Big Dipper

What is clemency?
mercy; lenience

What is debauchery?
excessive indulgence in sensual pleasures

What is disenefranchisement?
the state of being deprived of a right or privilege, especially the right to vote

What is equanimity?
mental calmness, composure, and evenness of temper, especially in a difficult situation

What is fodder?
food for cattle and other livestock; a person or thing regarded only as material for a specific use

What is gallbladder inflammation called?
cholecystitis

What is gruel?
thin liquid food of oatmeal or other meal boiled in milk or water

What is indignation?
anger or annoyance provoked by what is perceived as unfair treatment

What is inducement?
thing that persuades or influences someone to do something; (law) introductory statements in a pleading explaining the matter in dispute

What is intelligentsia?
status class of educated people engaged in the complex mental labours that critique, guide, and lead in shaping the culture and politics of their society

What is Morocco's largest city?
Casablanca

What is muslin?
lightweight cotton cloth in a plain weave; a hemmed square of light cotton cloth used to wipe up regurgitated milk when feeding or burping a baby

What is one's ilk?
type of people or things similar to that person

What is pareidolia?
the tendency to perceive a specific, often meaningful image in a random or ambiguous visual pattern

What is parquet?
flooring composed of wooden blocks arranged in a geometric pattern

What is perdition?
eternal damnation

What is prattle?
foolish or inconsequential talk

What is putrefaction?
the process of decay or rotting in a body or other organic matter

What is self-fertilization occurring within a permanently closed flower called?
cleistogamy

What is self-flagellation?
the action of flogging oneself; excessive criticism of oneself

What is skein?
length of thread or yarn, loosely coiled and knotted

What is someone fond of motion pictures called?
cinephile

What is species formation without branching of the evolutionary line of descent called, as opposed to cladogenesis?
anagenesis

What is the abnormal enlargement of the right side of the heart as a result of disease of the lungs or the pulmonary blood vessels called?
cor pulmonale

What is the action of reducing a material, an ore, to minute particles or fragments called?
comminution

What is the association between two organisms in which one benefits and the other derives neither benefit nor harm called?
commensalism

What is the attribute of grace, benevolence, or compassion, especially (in Kabbalism) as one of the sephiroth, called?
chesed

What is the basic monetary unit of Costa Rica and El Salvador?
colón

What is the basic monetary unit of Nicaragua?
cordoba

What is the binomial name of the bottlenose dolphin?
Tursiops truncatus

What is the Camorra?
criminal organization

What is the capital and chief port of French Guiana?
Cayenne

What is the capital of Buryatia?
Ulan-Ude

What is the capital of Chhattisgarh?
Raipur

What is the capital of Chiapas?
Tuxtla Gutiérrez

What is the capital of Chuvashia?
Cheboksary

What is the capital of Coahuila?
Saltillo

What is the capital of Hell in Milton's Paradise lost?
Pandemonium

What is the capital of the Canary Islands?
Las Palmas

What is the catarrhal inflammation of the mucous membrane in the nose, caused especially by a cold or hay fever, called?
coryza

What is the chemical formula of cholesterol?
C27H45OH

What is the chief Pacific Ocean port of Colombia?
Buenaventura

What is the conical lower extremity of the spinal cord called?
conus medullaris

What is the covenant between God and humanity that Jesus Christ established at the Atonement called in Calvinism?
covenant of grace

What is the covenant between God and humanity that was broken by Adam's sin at the Fall called in Calvinism?
covenant of works

What is the Czech name for the lager-producing city Budweis?
České Budějovice

What is the depression in the external ear leading to its central opening called?
concha

What is the eating of feces or dung called?
coprophagy

What is the eighth closest satellite to Jupiter?
Callisto

What is the emotional reaction of the analyst to the subject's contribution in psychoanalysis called?
countertransference

What is the failure of an injured plaintiff to act prudently, considered to be a contributory factor in the injury suffered, and sometimes reducing the amount recovered from the defendant called?
contributory negligence

What is the fear of clowns called?
coulrophobia

What is the fifth period of the Paleozoic era?
Carboniferous

What is the formation of a new group of organisms or higher taxon by evolutionary divergence from an ancestral form called, as opposed to anagenesis?
cladogenesis

What is the French for ``lost wax''?
cire perdue

What is the German name for Bratislava?
Pressburg

What is the heraldic term for a hat or cap?
chapeau

What is the highest male adult singing voice?
countertenor

What is the highest peak in Mexico?
Citlaltépetl

What is the highest peak in New Zealand?
Mount Cook

What is the highest point of the Coast Mountains?
Mount Waddington

What is the Hungarian name for Hungary?
Magyarország

What is the instance of the partial collapse of a vertebra, either from trauma to the spine or through the weakening of the bone, called?
compression fracture

What is the Italian for sea bass?
branzino

What is the largest city, chief port, commercial centre, and political centre of Benin?
Cotonou

What is the largest of the Solomon Islands, named after a French explorer who visited it in 1768?
Bougainville

What is the longest river in New England?
Connecticut River

What is the lowest female singing voice?
contralto

What is the lowest point of a ridge or saddle between two peaks, typically affording a pass from one side of a mountain range to another, called?
col

What is the medical term for gallstone formation?
cholelithiasis

What is the more common name of carbonyl chloride?
phosgene

What is the name of Spain's legislative assembly?
Cortes

What is the name of the British sovereign's court?
Court of St. James's

What is the national sport of Afghanistan?
buzkashi

What is the official name for Guyana?
Cooperative Republic of Guyana

What is the pair of appendages under the abdomen of a male shark or ray, or at the end of the abdomen of a male insect, used to hold the female during copulation called?
claspers

What is the recital of divine threats against sinners in the Anglican Liturgy for Ash Wednesday called?
commination

What is the schematic representation of the human body in which a part's size is proportional to its corresponding motor or sensory importance called?
homunculus

What is the second month of the civil and eighth of the religious year in the Jewish calendar, usually coinciding with parts of October and November?
Hesvan

What is the severe burning pain in a limb caused by injury to a peripheral nerve called?
causalgia

What is the smallest of the three main islands of Malta?
Comino

What is the solar plexus?
complex of ganglia and radiating nerves of the sympathetic system at the pit of the stomach

What is the southern part of the eastern coast of India, from Point Calimere to the mouth of the Krishna River, called?
Coromandel Coast

What is the study of place names?
toponymy

What is the study or collection of mollusk shells called?
conchology

What is the substitution of the name of an attribute or adjunct for that of the thing meant called?
metonymy

What is the sudden mass disappearance of the majority of worker bees in a colony called?
colony collapse disorder

What is the supposed faculty of perceiving things or events in the future or beyond normal sensory contact called?
clairvoyance

What is the surgical removal of the gallbladder called?
cholecystectomy

What is the system of neural pathways in a brain or nervous system called?
connectome

What is the technical term for a blackhead?
comedo

What is the technical term for a callus?
callosity

What is the technical term for a stringed instrument?
chordophone

What is the technical term for earwax?
cerumen

What is the technical term for the collarbone?
clavicle

What is the technical term for the neck?
cervix

What is the Tibetan name for Mount Everest?
Qomolungma

What is the translation of the Horatian quotation, ``naturam expellas furca, tamen usque recurret''?
you may drive nature out with a pitchfork, but she will keep coming back

What is the treatment of light and shade in drawing and painting called?
chiaroscuro

What is the upper front part of the right ventricle of the heart called?
conus arteriosus

What is the bad use of a comma to link two independent clauses called?
comma splice

What is virility?
(in a man) the quality of having strength, energy, and a strong sex drive; manliness

What island in eastern Virginia, west of Assateague Island, is noted for its wild horses?
Chincoteague Island

What island in the Philippines, just south of the Bataan Peninsula on Luzon Island, was the scene of World War II battles and is now a national shrine?
Corregidor

What island located west of Mull in the Inner Hebrides of Scotland is known for its sandy beaches, which rise to form large sand dunes, its corncrakes, and Breacachadh Castle?
Coll

What Italian composer, pianist, conductor, editor, writer, and teacher's compositions include works for piano, among them a monumental Piano Concerto, and transcriptions of the works of others, notably Johann Sebastian Bach?
Ferruccio Busoni

What Italian dish of raw beef cured by salting and air-drying is served typically in slices with a dressing of olive oil, lemon juice, and black pepper?
bresaola

What Italian hors d'oeuvre consists of thin slices of raw beef or fish served with a sauce?
carpaccio

What Italian name is given to a thin slice of beef or other meat wrapped around a filling and cooked in wine?
braciola

What Jewish Sabbath dish consists of slowly baked meat and vegetables, prepared on a Friday and cooked overnight?
cholent

What Judeo-Christian word for hell comes from the Hebrew for a place near Jerusalem where children were sacrificed to Baal?
Gehenna (Jer. 19.5--6)

What Jungian principle of reason and judgment is associated with the animus and often contrasted with Eros?
Logos

What kind of adjective describes the class to which a head noun belongs and characterized by not having a comparative or superlative?
classifying adjective

What kind of alcohol is Cinzano?
vermouth

What kind of compound has molecules of one component physically trapped within the crystal structure of another?
clathrate

What kind of rocks are composed of broken pieces of older rocks?
clastic rocks

What kind of spore is produced asexually by various fungi at the tip of a specialized hypha?
conidium

What kind of tart is made of fruit, typically cherries, and baked in a sweet batter?
clafoutis

What kind of tax is levied on profit from the sale of a property or investment?
capital gains tax

What king of Persia (529--522 BC) and son of Cyrus is chiefly remembered for his conquest of Egypt in 525 BC?
Cambyses

What Korean dish is made of thin beef slices marinated and grilled on a barbecue?
bulgogi

What lake in North America, east of the Adirondack Mountains, forms part of the border between the states of New York and Vermont, its northern tip extending into Quebec?
Lake Champlain

What lake in southwestern Germany on the northern side of the Swiss Alps where Germany, Switzerland, and Austria meet forms part of the course of the Rhine River and is called ``Bodensee'' in German?
Lake Constance

What lake of glacial origin in Lombardy is the third-largest lake in Italy and has a characteristic ``Y'' shape?
Lake Como

What lake on the Zambezi River in western Mozambique has its waters impounded by a dam and massive hydroelectric complex?
Cabora Bassa

What large bone forming the heel articulates with the cuboid bone of the foot and the talus bone of the ankle and is attached to the Achilles tendon?
calcaneus

What large but inconspicuous northern constellation (the Giraffe) is located between Polaris and Perseus?
Camelopardalis

What large class of small aquatic crustaceans with paddle-like feet comprises many creatures occurring in plankton or on larger aquatic animals as parasites?
Copepoda

What large group of arthropods comprises the arachnids, sea spiders, and horseshoe crabs?
Chelicerata

What large Hungarian dulcimer did you see at Sörforrás Étterem Restaurant in Budapest?
cymbalom

What large northern constellation (the Whale) is said to represent the sea monster that threatened Andromeda and contains the variable star Mira?
Cetus

What large piece of cloth is wrapped around the head and upper body leaving only the face exposed, worn especially by Muslim women?
chador

What large southern constellation lies in the Milky Way and contains the stars Alpha Centauri and Proxima Centauri?
Centaurus

What large yellow dessert pear's name refers to a cooperative of Angers where it was developed?
Doyenne du Comice

What large, bony marine fish with a three-lobed tail fin and fleshy pectoral fins is thought to be related to the ancestors of land vertebrates and was known only from fossils until one was found alive in 1938?
coelacanth

What largely rural county in east-central California in the Sierra Nevada is associated with the 1840s gold rush and the writings of Mark Twain?
Calaveras County

What largely secret society in South Africa founded in 1918 promotes the interests of and restricted in membership to male, Protestant Afrikaners?
Broederbond

What Latin adverb translates as ``against the world''?
contra mundum

What Latin adverbial phrase means ``with other conditions remaining the same''?
ceteris paribus

What Latin jural term refers to the facts and circumstances constituting a breach of the law?
corpus delicti

What Latin name is given to an existing melody used as the basis for a polyphonic composition?
cantus firmus

What Latin phrase refers to the principle that the buyer alone is responsible for checking the quality and suitability of goods before a purchase is made?
caveat emptor

What Latin phrase which appears in Hamlet (1.5.159) means ``here and everywhere''?
hic et ubique

What Latin poet of the late Roman Republic wrote chiefly in the neoteric style of poetry is known for his love poems?
Gaius Valerius Catullus

What Latin term acts as an adjective to describe something genuine or authentic or as an adverb in law to denote something done sincerely and without the intention to deceive?
bona fide

What Latin term acts as an adjective to describe something genuine or authentic or as an adverb in law to denote something done sincerely and without the intention to deceive?
bona fide

What law states that the volume of an ideal gas at constant pressure is directly proportional to the absolute temperature?
Charles's law

What learned centaur acted as teacher to Jason, Achilles, and many other heroes in Greek mythos?
Chiron

What leaven or food mixed with leaven is prohibited during Passover?
chametz

What legendary Christian martyr was adopted as the patron saint of travellers since it is said that he once carried Christ in the form of a child across a river?
St. Christopher

What legendary founder of the Roman Republic traditionally led a popular uprising after the rape of Lucretia against his uncle, the king, and drove him from Rome?
Lucius Junius Brutus

What leguminous climbing plant (Mucuna pruriens) has hairy pods that cause stinging and itching?
cowage

What lemon-yellow radioactive mineral consisting of hydrated vanadate of uranium and potassium is often found near petrified trees?
carnotite

What lighted candle symbolizes Christ as the light of the world and is held by children at a special Advent service originating in the Moravian Church?
Christingle

What lightweight quick-firing machine gun was used by the Allied Forces in World War II?
Bren

What linguistic term refers to the thing for which a word or phrase denotes or stands?
referent

What linguistic verb referring to juxtaposition or grouping in a syntactic relation more broadly means to subsume isolated facts under a general concept?
colligate

What literary term for a girdle or belt refers to a ring at either end of a column shaft in architecture?
cincture

What literary term for a line of animals or slaves fastened or driven along together comes from the Arabic for ``caravan''?
coffle

What literary term is given to a rooster, especially in fairy tales?
chanticleer

What literary word from the French for ``trimming, flounce'' means ``adorn with trimmings''?
furbelow

What literary word refers to confinement, as if in a cloister?
claustration

What loaf of white leavened bread, typically plaited in form, is traditionally baked to celebrate the Jewish sabbath?
challah

What long woolen tunic was worn in ancient Greece?
chiton

What lowland plain in central South America, the site and namesake of a boundary dispute, extends from southern Bolivia through Paraguay to northern Argentina?
Gran Chaco

What lung disease is caused by prolonged inhalation of textile fibre dust?
byssinosis

What main protein in milk and (coagulated) in cheese is used in processed foods and in adhesives, paints, and other industrial products?
casein

What mainly humorous noun coming from the Greek for ``section, roll of papyrus, volume'' refers to a book, especially a large, heavy, scholarly one?
tome

What major nerve extending from the lower end of the spinal cord down the back of the thigh and dividing above the knee joint is the nerve with the largest diameter in the human body?
sciatic nerve

What major waterway of central Thailand is formed by the junction of the Ping and Nan Rivers?
Chao Phraya

What malodorous, toxic, spontaneously flammable liquid compound has the chemical formula ((CH3)2As)2?
cacodyl

What map uses differences in shading, colouring, or the placing of symbols within predefined areas to indicate the average values of a property or quantity in those areas?
choropleth map

What material of which the chromosomes of organisms other than bacteria are composed consists of protein, RNA, and DNA?
chromatin

What medical adjective describes a fracture producing multiple bone splinters?
comminuted

What medical adjective refers to something pressed close together, contracted, or confined?
coarctate

What medical condition involves strong emotion or laughter causing a person to suffer sudden physical collapse though remaining conscious?
cataplexy

What medicinal term refers to limping?
claudication

What medieval historical romance in French verse is typically connected with Charlemagne?
chanson de geste

What medieval vocal composition consisted of one to four voice parts, the lowest of which was composed of a Latin text set to an invented melody and accompanied homophonically by the other voices?
conductus

What medium- to large-sized variety of pear, golden brown in colour, often russeted, and named after a French naturalist, has a dense flesh that makes it a common choice for baking and cooking?
Bosc pear

What method of classification of animals and plants according to the proportion of measurable characteristics that they have in common assumes that the higher the proportion of characteristics that two organisms share, the more recently they diverged from a common ancestor?
cladistics

What metrical foot consists of two short (or unstressed) syllables between two long (or stressed) ones?
choriambus

What military strike force consisting of units from the US Army, Air Force, and Navy was established in 1979 (as the Rapid Deployment Force) to operate in the Middle East and North Africa?
Central Command

What milky fluid consisting of fat droplets and lymph drains from the lacteals of the small intestine into the lymphatic system during digestion?
chyle

What minute rounded calcareous platelets form the spherical shells of single-celled marine flagellates?
coccoliths

What mixture of oil and balsam is consecrated and used for anointing at baptism and in other rites of Catholic, Orthodox, and Anglican Churches?
chrism

What moiety has the chemical formula CH3CO?
acetyl

What monetary unit of Bhutan is equal to one hundredth of a ngultrum?
chetrum

What monetary unit of Gambia is equal to one hundredth of a dalasi?
butut

What monetary unit of Lithuania is equal to one hundredth of a litas?
centas

What monetary unit of Mexico, Brazil, and certain other countries (including Portugal until the introduction of the euro) is equal to one hundredth of the basic unit?
centavo

What monks or nuns of an order founded in 1098 as a stricter branch of the Benedictines are now divided into two observances, the strict observance, whose adherents are known popularly as Trappists, and the common observance, which has certain relaxations?
Cistercians

What monstrous watchdog with three (or in some accounts fifty) heads guarded the entrance to Hades?
Cerberus

What month of the French Republican calendar (1793--1805) originally ran from 22 October to 20 November and was the second?
Brumaire

What most recent era follows the Mesozoic era and comprises the Tertiary and Quaternary periods?
Cenozoic

What most southern point of South America, on a Chilean island south of Tierra del Fuego, is notorious for its storms and, until the opening of the Panama Canal in 1914, constituted the only sea route between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans?
Cape Horn

What mountain chain that extends across northern Alaska is the northwestern end of the Rockies?
Brooks Range

What mountain in the Harz Mountains of Germany is noted for the optical phenomenon of a spectre in which a greatly enlarged image appears projected on clouds and for witches' revels that reputedly took place there on Walpurgis night?
Brocken

What mountain pass in eastern Mexico, between Veracruz and Jalapa, was the scene of an 1847 victory by US forces in the Mexican War?
Cerro Gordo

What mountain pass in the Taurus Mountains in southern Turkey formed part of a route that linked Anatolia with the Mediterranean coast?
Cilician Gates

What mountain range is located on the southeastern edge of the Massif Central in France?
Cévennes

What mountain range that curves northwest for 1,000 miles (1,600 km) from British Columbia to Alaska and extends the line of the Cascade Mountains has its highest peak at Mount Waddington?
Coast Mountains

What mucous membrane covers the front of the eye and lines the inside of the eyelids?
conjunctiva

What museum established with public funds in 1753 includes among its holdings the Magna Carta, the Elgin Marbles, and the Rosetta Stone?
British Museum

What musical adverb directs the musician to decrease in tempo and volume of sound gradually?
calando

What musical direction means ``to be played as a duet at one keyboard''?
à quatre mains

What Muslim philosophical school asserts the doctrine of free will in opposition to Jabriyah?
Qadariyya

What mythical animal is depicted as a two-legged dragon (or wyvern) with a cock's head in heraldry?
cockatrice

What name describes abnormally coloured vision, a rare symptom of varied cause?
chromatopsia

What name does a calf-high or knee-high boot of cloth or leather share with the style or spirit of tragic drama?
buskin

What name for a colourless orange-flavoured liqueur comes from a family of liqueur producers based in Angers?
Cointreau

What name for a simple aria with a repetitive rhythm or the uniformly quick final section of an aria comes from a variant of the Italian for ``short stanza''?
cabaletta

What name for a thin, flexible surgical instrument for exploring or dilating a passage of the body comes from the French for ``wax candle'' and originally from the name of an Algerian town that traded in wax?
bougie

What name for the parliament of modern Israel, established in 1949 and consisting of one hundred and twenty members elected every four years, comes from the Hebrew for ``gathering''?
Knesset

What name given to the head of certain universities, colleges, and schools comes from the Latin for ``ruler''?
rector

What name is ascribed to a slender tendril or hairlike filament, such as the appendage of a barnacle, the barbel of a fish, or the intromittent organ of an earthworm?
cirrus

What name is ascribed to each of a pair of hinged pincer-like claws terminating the anterior limbs of a crab, lobster, or scorpion, typically curved and sharply pointed and used for feeding, defence, and courtship?
chela

What name is ascribed to the drawing together of the separated tissue in a wound or fracture?
coaptation

What name is ascribed to the end of a knife's cutting edge nearer to the handle?
choil

What name is ascribed to various mountain ranges that extend from southern California to Alaska?
Coast Ranges

What name is assigned to either of a pair of appendages in front of the mouth in arachnids and some other arthropods, usually modified as pincer-like claws?
chelicera

What name is associated with a material that accumulates at the foot of a steep slope?
colluvium

What name is associated with the movement of a motile cell or organism, or part of one, in a direction corresponding to a gradient of increasing or decreasing concentration of a particular substance?
chemotaxis

What name is associated with the scar of a healed wound or a scar on the bark of a tree?
cicatrix

What name is associated with the supposed faculty of perceiving, as if by hearing, what is inaudible?
clairaudience

What name is associated with the X-ray examination of the gallbladder, especially used to detect the presence of gallstones?
cholecystography

What name is attributed to a compound containing a ligand (typically organic) bonded to a central metal atom at two or more points?
chelate

What name is attributed to a muscular spasm involving repeated, often rhythmic, contractions?
clonus

What name is attributed to either the X-shaped structure formed at the point below the brain where the two optic nerves cross over each other or a point at which paired chromosomes remain in contact during the first metaphase of meiosis?
chiasma

What name is given by Swift in Gulliver's travels to a land where everything is huge?
Brobdingnag

What name is given either to a break between words within a metrical foot or a pause near the middle of a line?
caesura

What name is given to a body of algal or fungal cytoplasm containing several nuclei enclosed in a single membrane?
coenocyte

What name is given to a bunch of herbs, typically encased in a cheesecloth bag, used for flavouring a stew or soup?
bouquet garni

What name is given to a canon in which the theme or subject is repeated backward in the second part?
canon cancrizans

What name is given to a composition in a series of varying sections in slow triple time, typically over a short repeated bass theme?
chaconne

What name is given to a crustacean larva in its first stage after leaving the egg and with three pairs of appendages, a median eye, and little or no segmentation?
nauplius

What name is given to a curling tournament?
bonspiel

What name is given to a curling tournament?
bonspiel

What name is given to a decorative work in which enamel, glass, or gemstones are separated by strips of flattened wire placed edgeways on a metal backing?
cloisonné

What name is given to a group of organisms believed to have evolved from a common ancestor?
clade

What name is given to a half turn to the right or left by a horse?
caracole

What name is given to a keel-shaped structure?
carina

What name is given to a large branched candlestick or holder for several candles or lamps?
candelabrum

What name is given to a large volcanic crater, especially one formed by a major eruption leading to the collapse of the mouth of the volcano?
caldera

What name is given to a Latin cross with a circle around the centre?
Celtic cross

What name is given to a loosely bound pair of electrons with opposite spins moving with the same speed in opposite directions, causing superconductivity?
Cooper pair

What name is given to a measure of the strength of interaction between two particles or a particle and a field?
coupling constant

What name is given to a member of the highest Hindu caste, that of the priesthood?
Brahman

What name is given to a Muslim judge who interprets and administers the religious law of Islam?
qadi

What name is given to a narrow country road in Ireland?
boreen

What name is given to a native of Rio de Janeiro?
Carioca

What name is given to a partition or shaft lining in a coal mine, typically made of wood or heavy cloth?
brattice

What name is given to a pendulum constructed from metals with differing expansion coefficients to neutralize the effects of temperature variation?
compensation pendulum

What name is given to a person whose job is to transcribe speech in shorthand?
stenographer

What name is given to a publisher's emblem or imprint, especially one on the title page or spine of a book?
colophon

What name is given to a reoffending criminal?
recidivist

What name is given to a sailboat with a single mast placed well forward and carrying only one sail?
catboat

What name is given to a sequence of three nucleotides which together form a unit of genetic code in a DNA or RNA molecule?
codon

What name is given to a set of bells in a tower played using a keyboard or by an automatic mechanism similar to a piano roll?
carillon

What name is given to a severe abscess or multiple boils in the skin, typically infected with staphylococcus bacteria?
carbuncle

What name is given to a short operatic aria in simple style without repeated sections?
cavatina

What name is given to a shrill howling or wailing noise like that of a cat?
caterwaul

What name is given to a small software application stored as a bookmark in a web browser, typically allowing a user to interact with the currently loaded web page somehow?
bookmarklet

What name is given to a structure resembling a tail?
cauda

What name is given to a swollen, inflamed lymph node in the armpit or groin?
bubo

What name is given to a system or group of parallel mountain ranges together with the intervening plateaus and other features, especially in the Andes or the Rockies?
cordillera

What name is given to a writ ordering the arrest of a named person?
capias

What name is given to an aquatic invertebrate animal of a phylum (Cnidaria) that includes jellyfishes, corals, and sea anemones distinguished by having a tube- or cup-shaped body and a single opening ringed with tentacles?
coelenterate

What name is given to an artificial narrowing or turn on a road or auto-racing course?
chicane

What name is given to an outgrowth from a seed near the micropyle, attractive to ants that aid the seed's dispersal?
caruncle

What name is given to each of the two threadlike strands into which a chromosome divides longitudinally during cell division?
chromatid

What name is given to each of two twisted membranous strips joining the yolk to the ends of the shell in a bird's egg?
chalaza

What name is given to either the sepals of a flower, typically forming a whorl that encloses the petals and forms a protective layer around a flower in bud or a cuplike cavity or structure?
calyx

What name is given to enamelwork in which hollows made in a metal surface are filled with colored enamel?
champlevé

What name is given to entertainment held in a nightclub or restaurant while the audience eats or drinks at tables or the nightclub or restaurant itself?
cabaret

What name is given to friars belonging to a branch of the Franciscan order that observe a strict rule drawn up in 1529?
Capuchin

What name is given to handwriting, as distinct from typography?
chirography

What name is given to intermittent weak contractions of the uterus occurring during pregnancy?
Braxton Hicks contractions

What name is given to leaven or food mixed with leaven, prohibited during Passover?
chametz

What name is given to low-pitched stop in an organ or harmonium, typically a sixteen-foot stopped diapason?
bourdon

What name is given to members of an early Nazi militia founded by Hitler in Munich in 1921, with uniforms resembling that of Mussolini's Blackshirts, who aided Hitler's rise to power but were eclipsed by the SS after the ``night of the long knives'' in June 1934?
Brownshirts/Storm Troops/Sturmabteilung

What name is given to musical compositions for a group of solo instruments accompanied by an orchestra?
concerti grossi

What name is given to one of a mythical race of one-eyed men of Scythia represented in ancient art as in constant strife with griffins for gold guarded by the griffins?
arimasp

What name is given to rain trees in the West Indies?
guango

What name is given to rock consisting of angular fragments cemented together?
breccia

What name is given to spiritual leader among Sephardic Jews, or, more generally, a person learned in Jewish law, originating from the Hebrew for ``wise''?
chacham

What name is given to the abnormal enlargement of the heart?
cardiomegaly

What name is given to the abnormal widening of the bronchi or their branches that causes a risk of infection?
bronchiectasis

What name is given to the art or practice of bell-ringing?
campanology

What name is given to the axis of a woody plant, especially a palm or tree fern, comprising the stem and root?
caudex

What name is given to the body cavity in metazoans, located between the intestinal canal and the body wall?
coelom

What name is given to the compression of the heart by an accumulation of fluid in the pericardial sac?
cardiac tamponade

What name is given to the concentration of sense organs, nervous control, etc., at the anterior end of the body, forming a head and brain, both during evolution and in the course of an embryo's development?
cephalization

What name is given to the curve between two points along which a body can move under gravity in the shortest possible time?
brachistochrone

What name is given to the distance between the front and rear of the pelvis?
conjugate diameter

What name is given to the double dagger symbol in printing or the difference between an octave and three justly tuned major thirds?
diesis

What name is given to the exterior covering or appendage of some seeds (as of the yew) that develops after fertilization as an outgrowth from the ovule stalk?
aril

What name is given to the first day of the month in the ancient Roman calendar?
calends

What name is given to the flesh of goats as food?
chevon

What name is given to the Geneva Bible of 1560?
Breeches Bible

What name is given to the groove around the cylindrical part of a bullet?
cannelure

What name is given to the highest voice in a polyphonic choral work?
cantus

What name is given to the hollow lower part of the shaft of a feather which lacks barbs?
calamus

What name is given to the involuntary and repetitive use of obscene language as a symptom of mental illness or organic brain disease?
coprolalia

What name is given to the involuntary habitual grinding of the teeth, typically during sleep?
bruxism

What name is given to the Kantian unconditional moral obligation binding in all circumstances and not dependent on a person's inclination or purpose?
categorical imperative

What name is given to the low trilling sound of an insect?
chirr

What name is given to the lower house of Parliament in Germany?
Bundestag

What name is given to the main branch of a tree?
bough

What name is given to the most recently evolved cortical component which differentiates the human brain from the cetacean?
neocortex

What name is given to the observed tendency of humans to quickly return to a relatively stable level of happiness despite major positive or negative events or life changes?
hedonic treadmill

What name is given to the outer or inner corner of the eye where the upper and lower lids meet?
canthus

What name is given to the Paris stock exchange?
the Bourse

What name is given to the period of a Paleolithic culture of North Africa and southern Europe, noted for its microliths and dated to 8000--4500 BC?
Capsian

What name is given to the petals of a flower, typically forming a whorl within the sepals and enclosing the reproductive organs?
corolla

What name is given to the protein coat or shell of a virus particle surrounding the nucleic acid or nucleoprotein core?
capsid

What name is given to the quantity obtained from a determinant of a square matrix by removal of the row and column containing a specified element?
cofactor

What name is given to the raised curved part at the back of a horse's saddle?
cantle

What name is given to the red prominence at the inner corner of the eye?
caruncle

What name is given to the replacement by water molecules of a coordinated atom or group in a coordination complex?
aquation

What name is given to the roots of the lumbar and sacral spinal nerves, which form a bundle within the lowest part of the spinal column?
cauda equina

What name is given to the stiff bristle made of chitin, especially in an annelid worm?
chaeta

What name is given to the stipulation in civil and Roman law whereby an obligation can be reduced to a stipulation and then discharged by an acceptilation?
Aquilian stipulation

What name is given to the study of mosses and liverworts?
bryology

What name is given to the third part of an ancient Greek drama in which the action is heightened for the catastrophe?
catastasis

What name is given to the upper of the two gray nuclei of the corpus striatum in the cerebrum of the brain?
caudate nucleus

What name is given to the wattle of a bird such as a turkey?
caruncle

What name is shared between a curved bundle of nerve fibres in each hemisphere of the brain and a ridge of enamel on the base or margin of the crown of a tooth?
cingulum

What name is shared between a fruit preserved or cooked in syrup and a bowl-shaped dessert dish with a stem?
compote

What name is shared between a high executive officer of various Muslim countries, especially of the Ottoman Empire, and a civil officer in ancient Egypt with viceregal powers?
vizier

What name is shared between a horn-shaped projection of the thyroid cartilage or of certain bones, either of the two lateral cavities of the uterus into which the fallopian tubes pass, and each of three elongated parts of the lateral ventricles of the brain?
cornu

What name is shared between an official appointed by a government to live in a foreign city and protect and promote the government's citizens and interests there, one of the two annually elected chief magistrates who jointly ruled Rome, and any of the three chief magistrates of the first French republic?
consul

What name was given to a glossy woollen cloth checkered on one side only?
calamanco

What name was given to a hair shirt?
cilice

What name was given to a large two-handled drinking cup in ancient Greece and Rome?
cantharus

What name was given to a lieutenant or deputy in the service of the Ottoman Empire?
kaimakam

What name was given to a member of the French Protestant insurgents who rebelled against the persecution that followed the revocation of the Edict of Nantes?
Camisard

What name was given to male singers castrated in boyhood to retain a soprano or alto voice?
castrato

What name was given to silver coins having the device of an eagle issued by various Italian states, the most famous of which was the first, issued in Padua in the thirteenth century?
aquilino

What name was given to the commander of a century in the ancient Roman army?
centurion

What name was given to the inner area of an ancient temple, especially one housing the hidden cult image in a Greek or Roman temple?
cella

What name was given to the national militia in England before the Norman Conquest?
fyrd

What name was given to the woman who enacted the hieros gamos with the Mesopotamian emperor?
hierodule

What name, derived from the Burmese for ``hill man,'' refers to members of a people of southwestern Myanmar and neighbouring parts of India and Bangladesh?
Chin

What narrow neck of land separates the Gulf of Corinth from the Saronic Gulf and links the Peloponnese with central Greece?
Isthmus of Corinth

What narrow strip of Namibia extends toward Zambia from the northeastern corner of Namibia and reaches the Zambezi River?
Caprivi Strip

What NASA satellite was launched in 1989 to map the background microwave radiation from space in a search for evidence of the Big Bang?
COBE

What national wildlife refuge in southwestern Arizona, in the Sonoran Desert, is named after a mountain range which is home to bighorn sheep and other species?
Cabeza Prieta

What native people who formerly inhabited the Canary islands bore a superficial skeletal resemblance to the Cro-Magnon type?
Guanche

What network of blood vessels in each ventricle of the brain is derived from the pia mater and produces the cerebrospinal fluid?
choroid plexus

What neurological disorder is characterized by jerky involuntary movements affecting especially the shoulders, hips, and face?
chorea

What nonsense word coined by Lewis Carroll in The Hunting of the Shark is used to denote an imaginary dangerous animal?
boojum

What nonsense word coined by Lewis Carroll in The Hunting of the Shark is used to denote an imaginary dangerous animal?
boojum

What North American titmouse is named after the sound of its call?
chickadee

What northern constellation (the Herdsman) is said to represent a man holding the leash of two dogs (Canes Venatici) while driving a bear (Ursa Major) and contains Arcturus?
Boötes

What Northern Irish county has its chief town in Enniskillen?
Fermanagh

What northernmost city of Chile serves as a port and is known as ``the city of the eternal spring''?
Arica

What Norwegian stateswoman chaired the World Commission on Environment and Development, which produced the Our Common Future report in 1987, as Norway's first female prime minister?
Gro Harlem Brundtland

What noun, which shares its name with Artemisia absinthium, is used to denote a state or source of bitterness or grief?
wormwood

What noun, whose name originates from the Latin for ``small,'' refers to any of a class of very small viruses chiefly affecting animals, especially one which causes contagious disease in dogs?
parvovirus

What nuclear reactor of a Canadian design has unenriched uranium oxide clad in zircaloy as fuel and heavy water as a coolant and moderator?
CANDU

What nymph of Greek mythos was changed into a bear by Zeus?
Callisto

What ocean passage between Newfoundland and Nova Scotia links the Gulf of St. Lawrence with the Atlantic Ocean?
Cabot Strait

What officer rank in the British army is above colonel and below major general?
brigadier

What offset printing method utilizes a gelatin-coated zinc plate hardened and sensitized to print type, line illustrations, and fine-screen halftones?
aquatone

What old man ferried the souls of the dead across the Styx and Acheron Rivers to Hades?
Charon

What one-syllable word means (of words or the person speaking them) fluent and voluble but insincere and shallow?
glib

What open carriage with a Polish name had a calash top and space for reclining?
britzka

What order of insects comprises the beetles (including weevils) and forms the largest order of animals on the earth?
Coleoptera

What order of insects comprises the springtails?
Collembola

What order of mammals comprises the bats?
Chiroptera

What order of marine mammals, comprising the whales, dolphins, and porpoises, have a streamlined hairless body, no hind limbs, a horizontal tail fin, and a blowhole on top of the head for breathing?
Cetacea

What order of minute branchiopod crustaceans includes the water fleas, typically having a transparent shell enclosing the trunk and large antennae used for swimming?
Cladocera

What organ stop has the quality of a flute?
clarabella

What organelle near the nucleus of a cell contains the centrioles (in animal cells) and begets the spindle fibres in cell division?
centrosome

What osteoarthritis of the hock in horses sometimes causes swelling and lameness?
bone spavin

What osteoarthritis of the hock in horses sometimes causes swelling and lameness?
bone spavin

What outermost membrane surrounding an embryo of a reptile, bird, or mammal contributes to the formation of the placenta in mammals?
chorion

What painful condition of the hand and fingers caused by compression of a major nerve may be caused by repetitive movements over a long period or by fluid retention and is characterized by sensations of tingling, numbness, or burning?
carpal tunnel syndrome

What pair of granite obelisks erected at Heliopolis by Tuthmosis III was taken from Egypt in 1878, one being set up on the Thames Embankment in London and the other in Central Park, New York?
Cleopatra's Needles

What papal verb means to ``express one's opinions in a way considered annoyingly pompous and dogmatic''?
pontificate

What part of the basal ganglia of the brain comprises the caudate and lentiform nuclei?
corpus striatum

What part of the eye connects the iris to the choroid?
ciliary body

What part of the Pacific Ocean is at the centre of the Molucca Islands?
Ceram Sea

What patterns are formed when a sand-covered surface is made to vibrate, the sand collecting in the regions of least motion?
Chladni figures

What peak on Mount Desert Island in southeastern Maine, within Acadia National Park, is the highest point on the east coast of the United States?
Cadillac Mountain

What peninsula in eastern North Carolina is often called ``the Graveyard of the Atlantic'' because of the treacherous waters around?
Cape Hatteras

What pentasyllabic adjective means ``surrounding,'' usually in a literary or formal setting?
circumambient

What people of northern Iran held political supremacy through the dynasty ruling Persia from 1794 to 1925?
Kajar

What people of southern Russia and Ukraine are noted for their horsemanship and military skill?
Cossacks

What perforated bowl is used to strain off liquid from food, especially after cooking?
colander

What period of Lower Palaeolithic culture of Europe dates to about 250,000--200,000 years ago?
Clactonian

What personality disorder is characterized by severe mood swings, impulsive behaviour, and difficulty forming stable personal relationships?
borderline personality disorder

What personification of Britain is usually depicted as a helmeted woman with a shield and trident?
Britannia

What philosophical and psychological term refers to volition---the mental faculty of purpose, desire, or will to perform an action?
conation

What philosophical concept is concerned with the art of investigating or discussing the truth of opinions or the inquiry into metaphysical contradictions and their solutions?
dialectics

What philosophical principle establishes the existence of a being from the fact of its thinking or awareness?
cogito

What phonetic adjective describes something pronounced with the tip of the tongue curled up toward the hard palate?
retroflex/cacuminal

What phonetic term refers to pronouncing two or more speech sounds together so that one influences the other?
coarticulation

What phrase from Shakespeare's Macbeth (1.4.7) was popularized by Sir Walter Scott and referred to a favourable position for observation or action?
coign of vantage

What phylum comprises the lamp shells?
Brachiopoda

What phylum includes the stoneworts, which are frequently treated as a class of the green algae?
Charophyta

What phylum of animals includes the vertebrates together with the sea squirts and lancelets?
Chordata

What phylum of aquatic invertebrate animals comprises the coelenterates?
Cnidaria

What phylum of sedentary aquatic invertebrates comprises the moss animals?
Bryozoa

What phylum that comprises the green algae is more recently treated as a phylum of the kingdom Protista?
Chlorophyta

What physical object generalizes the notion of a point particle to higher dimensions?
brane

What physiological adjective refers to a biological process recurring naturally on a twenty-four-hour cycle, even in the absence of light fluctuations?
circadian

What plane quartic curve associated with Nicomedes consists of two separate branches on either side of and asymptotic to a central straight line (the asymptote), such that if a line is drawn from a fixed point (the pole) to intersect both branches, the part of the line falling between the two branches is of constant length and is exactly bisected by the asymptote?
conchoid

What plant of the buttercup family, bearing showy flowers with backward-pointing spurs, native to temperate regions of the northern hemisphere, and widely grown in gardens, is associated with columbines?
aquilegia

What pointed oval figure used as an architectural feature and an aureole enclosing figures such as Jesus Christ or the Virgin Mary in medieval art is also referred to as ``vesica piscis'' `fish bladder'?
mandorla

What Polish river rises in the Carpathians flows through Kraków and Warsaw to the Baltic Sea near Gdánsk?
Vistula

What port city in northeastern Argentina in a farming region of Entre Ríos province is found on the Uruguay River and the border with Uruguay?
Concordia

What port of northeastern Algeria is adjacent to Hippo Regius, a prominent city in Roman Africa and the home and bishopric of St. Augustine of Hippo from 396 to 430?
Annaba/Bône

What port of northeastern Algeria is adjacent to Hippo Regius, a prominent city in Roman Africa and the home and bishopric of St. Augustine of Hippo from 396 to 430?
Annaba/Bône

What portable obstacle, consisting of a wooden frame covered with spikes or barbed wire, is used by the military to close off a passage or block enemy advancement?
cheval-de-frise

What Portuguese poet's most noted work, The Lusiads (1572), describes Vasco da Gama's discovery of the sea route to India?
Luis de Camões

What pouch is connected to the junction of the small and large intestines?
cecum

What powerful neurotoxin is found in the venom of the krait?
bungarotoxin

What primary skull of vertebrates, composed of cartilage in humans and most other vertebrates, is replaced by bone during development?
chondrocranium

What process involves making high-quality prints from a sheet of light-sensitive gelatin exposed photographically to the image without using a screen?
collotype

What projection jutting out from a wall is used to support a structure above it?
corbel

What protein binds calcium and regulates a variety of activities in cells?
calmodulin

What Provençal dish consists of salt cod mixed into a puree with olive oil and milk?
brandade

What provision of American federal law requires a waiting period for handgun purchases and background checks on those who wish to purchase handguns?
Brady Bill

What pseudonym did Charles Dickens use in his Pickwick Papers and contributions to the Morning Chronicle?
Boz

What psychiatric term is given to the abnormality of movement and behaviour arising from a disturbed mental state (typically schizophrenia) and may involve repetitive or purposeless overactivity, or catalepsy, resistance to passive movement, and negativism?
catatonia

What psychoactive resin comes from the flower heads of hemp?
charas

What psychological term is ascribed to having inconsistent thoughts, beliefs, or attitudes, especially relating to behavioural decisions and attitude change?
cognitive dissonance

What psychological term refers to an organized whole that is perceived as more than the sum of its parts?
gestalt

What pulpy acidic fluid passes from the stomach to the small intestine, consisting of gastric juices and partly digested food?
chyme

What quantum field theory describes the strong interaction as an interaction between quarks mediated by gluons?
QCD

What queen of the Britons and ruler of the Iceni tribe in eastern England led her forces in a revolt against the Romans and sacked Colchester, St. Albans, and London before being defeated by the Roman governor, Suetonius Paulinus?
Boudicca/Boadicea

What raised band encircling the body of oligochaete worms and some leeches is made up of reproductive segments?
clitellum

What range of hills is found on the border between England and Scotland?
Cheviot Hills

What range of the Alps on the border of southern Austria and northeastern Italy reaches 2,781 m at Monte Coglians (Hohe Warte)?
Carnic Alps

What range of volcanic mountains in western North America extends from southern British Columbia through Washington and Oregon to northern California and contains Mount St. Helens?
Cascade Range

What rare ``c'' term refers to the quality of having a physical body or existence?
corporeity

What rare word refers to a flock of finches?
chirm

What ratio of new orders to completed sales in the semiconductor industry is regarded as an economic indicator for overall trends in the technology sector?
book-to-bill ratio

What ratio of new orders to completed sales in the semiconductor industry is regarded as an economic indicator for overall trends in the technology sector?
book-to-bill ratio

What receptacle shaped like a shrine or a cup with an arched cover is used in the Christian Church to reserve the Eucharist?
ciborium

What red wine from Bordeaux or wine of a similar character made elsewhere shares its name with a deep purplish-red colour?
claret

What reflecting telescope involves light reflected from a convex secondary mirror being passed through a hole in the primary mirror?
Cassegrain telescope

What region of Antarctica which lies westward of Queen Maud Land and forms the eastern shore of the Weddell Sea was discovered from the Scotia by William S. Bruce, leader of the Scottish National Antarctic Expedition?
Coats Land

What resistance of a magnetic material to changes in magnetization is equivalent to the field intensity necessary to demagnetize the fully magnetized material?
coercivity

What resort in the White Mountains of north-central New Hampshire is noted as the site of United Nations conferences at the end of World War II?
Bretton Woods

What resort island in southwestern New Brunswick, off Eastport in Maine, is noted as the vacation home of Franklin D. Roosevelt?
Campobello Island

What rich, spicy stew or soup made with various kinds of fish is originally from Provence?
bouillabaisse

What river and essential trade route flows for 1,800 km from central Angola through southern and central Democratic Republic of Congo into the Congo River?
Kasai River

What river flows for 60 miles (100 km) through eastern Massachusetts, between Cambridge and Boston, to Boston Harbor?
Charles River

What river flows for 213 km through the Ozark Plateau in northwestern Arkansas and is a designated national preserve?
Buffalo River

What river flows for 600 miles (1,000 km) from New Mexico across Oklahoma to the Arkansas River near Tulsa?
Cimarron River

What river flows north for 120 miles (190 km) from the Maine border through Quebec and empties into the St. Lawrence River opposite Quebec City?
Chaudiere River

What river flows southeast across Texas from the Panhandle to the Gulf of Mexico?
Brazos River

What river in central Brazil flows for 2,195 kilometres north into the Tocantins River?
Araguaia

What river in southern Asia rises in the Himalayas and flows for 2,900 kilometres through Tibet, northeastern India, and Bangladesh to join the Ganges River at its delta on the Bay of Bengal?
Brahmaputra

What river in western France rises in the Massif Central and flows west for 225 miles (360 km) to the Bay of Biscay at Rochefort?
Charente

What river of northern India and Pakistan rises in the Himalayas and flows through Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir, joining the Sutlej River in Punjab, and is one of the five rivers that gave Punjab its name?
Chenab

What river that flows for 660 miles (1,060 km) through the Central African Republic, Chad, and Cameroon, emptying into Lake Chad, is the longest river in the African continent that drains internally?
Chari River

What Roman division of southwestern Gaul under Caesar consisted of the area between the Pyrenees Mountains and the Garonne River and under Augustus was expanded as far as the Loire and Allier rivers?
Aquitania

What Roman senator with Cassius led the conspirators who assassinated Julius Caesar in 44 and were later defeated by Caesar's supporters, Antony and Octavian, at the battle of Philippi in 42, after which he committed suicide?
Marcus Junius Brutus

What Romanian city belonged to Hungary until after World War I and was ceded to Romania in 1920?
Braşov

What Romanian-born American gymnast became the first Olympic competitor to be awarded the maximum score of 10.00 in 1976?
Nadia Comăneci

What room or building has niches for funeral urns to be stored?
columbarium

What rounded protuberance at the end of some bones forms an articulation with another bone?
condyle

What rounded underground storage organ present in plants such as crocuses, gladioli, and cyclamens consists of a swollen stem base covered with scale leaves?
corm

What route---which links Lashio, Myanmar to Kunming, China, and covers 1,154 km---was completed in 1939 by the Chinese to serve as a supply route to the interior in response to the Japanese occupation of the Chinese coast?
Burma Road

What ruling in European Court, named after a Belgian footballer, obliges professional football and other sports clubs to allow players over the age of twenty-five to move freely between clubs once their contracts have expired?
Bosman ruling

What Russian fish pie typically is made with salmon or sturgeon, hard-boiled eggs, mushrooms, and herbs, in a puff pastry shell?
coulibiac

What Russian unit of length was equivalent to about 0.66 miles, or 1.1 kilometres?
verst

What Russian word refers to a mall ventilation window usually spanning one pane?
fortochka

What Russian word refers to a soft food made from cooked buckwheat or similar grain or uncooked buckwheat groats?
kasha

What Russian-derived word either refers to a Russian vehicle pulled by a team of three horses abreast or a group of three people working together, especially in an administrative or managerial capacity?
troika

What scientific and philosophical rule posits that entities should not be multiplied, which is interpreted as requiring that the simplest of competing theories be preferred to the more complex or that explanations of unknown phenomena be sought first in terms of known quantities?
Occam's razor

What second brightest star in the sky and the brightest in the constellation Carina is a supergiant, visible only to observers in the southern hemisphere and the southern part of the northern hemisphere?
Canopus

What self-governing territory of the Netherlands, whose chief town is Kralendijk, was once one of the two principal islands of the Netherlands Antilles?
Bonaire

What self-governing territory of the Netherlands, whose chief town is Kralendijk, was once one of the two principal islands of the Netherlands Antilles?
Bonaire

What Serbian nationalist guerrilla force in the Balkans was active during World War II?
Chetniks

What serpent and embodiment of chaos did Re repel every morning?
Apophis

What service of evening prayers forming part of the Divine Office of the Western Christian Church is traditionally said (or chanted) before retiring for the night?
compline

What severe, often fluctuating pain in the abdomen is caused by intestinal gas or obstruction in the intestines and suffered especially by babies?
colic

What shallow lake on the borders of Chad, Niger, and Nigeria in north-central Africa seasonally varies in size from about 4,000 square miles (10,360 sq km) to about 10,000 square miles (25,900 sq km)?
Lake Chad

What sheath protects a young shoot tip in a grass or cereal?
coleoptile

What sheath protects the root of a germinating grass or cereal grain?
coleorhiza

What sheep of a New Zealand breed is kept for both wool and meat and named after an estate in northern Otago?
Corriedale

What short cloak was worn by men in ancient Greece?
chlamys

What Siberian mountain range runs northeast from Mongolia, passing just to the east of Lake Baikal and eventually joining the Stanovoi Range?
Yablonovy Mountains

What Sicilian seaport lies at the foot of Mount Etna?
Catania

What singing tree frog native to Puerto Rico has become an invasive pest in Hawaii?
coqui

What site in Britanny is home to nearly three thousand megalithic stones dating from the Neolithic period?
Carnac

What sixteenth-century enclosed bridge in Venice between the Doge's Palace and the state prison was originally crossed by prisoners on their way to torture or execution?
Bridge of Sighs

What sixth-century Irish abbess was venerated in Ireland as a virgin saint and noted in miracle stories for her compassion?
St. Bridget

What sleep-inducing and analgesic drug has the chemical formula C18H21NO3?
codeine

What slender nocturnal carnivorous mammal with a barred and spotted coat and well-developed anal scent glands is native to Africa and Asia?
civet

What small and faint southern constellation (the Chisel) is located next to Eridanus?
Caelum

What small and faint southern constellation (the Compasses) in the Milky Way is next to Centaurus?
Circinus

What small Andean guitar is traditionally made from an armadillo shell?
charango

What small constellation (the Great Dog) is said to represent one of the dogs following Orion, is just south of the celestial equator, and contains the brightest star, Sirius?
Canis Major

What small constellation (the Little Dog) is said to represent one of the dogs following Orion, is close to the celestial equator, and contains the bright star Procyon?
Canis Minor

What small inconspicuous northern constellation, said to represent the tresses of Queen Berenice of Egypt, wife of Ptolemy III, contains a large number of galaxies?
Coma Berenices

What small island in southern Massachusetts, just off the southeastern coast of Martha's Vineyard, was the scene of a car accident in 1969 that involved Senator Edward Kennedy in which his assistant Mary Jo Kopechne drowned?
Chappaquiddick Island

What small keyboard instrument works by felted hammers striking a row of steel plates suspended over wooden resonators, giving an ethereal bell-like sound?
celesta

What small lake in southern Massachusetts has the longest American place name?
Lake Chargoggagoggmanchauggagoggchaubunagungamaugg

What small melon with a pale green rind and orange flesh is named after a French region?
Charentais

What small northern constellation (the Hunting Dogs) is said to represent two dogs (Asterion and Chara) held on a leash by Boötes?
Canes Venatici

What small parasitic wasp of a family related to the ichneumons can lay numerous eggs in a single host?
braconid

What small phylum of marine invertebrates comprises the arrow worms?
Chaetognatha

What small pointed tool is used for piercing holes, especially in leather?
awl

What small protuberance, especially one of two pairs in the roof of the midbrain, is involved respectively in vision and hearing?
colliculus

What small toucan has a serrated bill and typically has a green back and wings, a yellow underside, and a red rump?
aracari

What small triangular bone at the base of the spinal column in humans and some apes was formed of fused vestigial vertebrae?
coccyx

What small, fast Spanish or Portuguese sailing ship sailed from the fifteenth to seventeenth centuries?
caravel

What small, four-stringed guitar resembling a ukulele is popular in Brazil and Portugal?
cavaquinho

What small, granular, opaque diamonds are used as an abrasive in cutting tools?
bort

What snake family, the largest one, includes grass snakes and garter snakes?
Colubridae

What South African politician was president of the Inkatha Freedom Party from 1975 to 2019?
Mangosuthu Buthelezi

What South African surgeon performed the first heart transplant in December 1967?
Christiaan Barnard

What southern constellation (the Keel) partly in the Milky Way and originally part of Argo contains the second brightest star in the sky, Canopus?
Carina

What southern French city is the site of the earliest Roman colony in Gaul?
Narbonne

What southern Indian river that rises in Karnataka and flows east to the Bay of Bengal, south of Puducherry is held sacred by Hindus?
Cauvery

What Soviet Russian currency unit was equivalent to one hundredth of a ruble?
kopeck

What Spanish enclave, consisting of a port and a military post, on the coast of Morocco overlooks the Mediterranean approach to the Strait of Gibraltar and with Melilla forms a community of Spain?
Ceuta

What spiked metal device is thrown on the ground to impede wheeled vehicles or cavalry horses?
caltrop

What spiral cavity of the inner ear contains the organ of Corti, which produces nerve impulses in response to sound vibrations?
cochlea

What spring was inhabited by a naiad-nymph and sacred in antiquity to Apollo and the Muses?
Castalian spring

What state is also known as ``the Cornhusker State''?
Nebraska

What state is known as ``the Buckeye State''?
Ohio

What state is known as ``the Centennial State''?
Colorado

What state is nicknamed ``the Boomer State''?
Oklahoma

What state is nicknamed ``the Bread and Butter State''?
Minnesota

What state is nicknamed ``the Breadbasket of America''?
Kansas

What state is nicknamed ``the Camellia State''?
Alabama

What state is nicknamed ``the Corn State''?
Iowa

What state is nicknamed ``the Cowboy State''?
Wyoming

What steep climbing turn is executed in an aircraft to gain height while changing the direction of flight?
chandelle

What stellar literary verb means ``to form or cause to form into a cluster or group''?
constellate

What stone carving of a draped female figure is used as a pillar to support the entablature of a Greek or Greek-style building?
caryatid

What strait separates North Island and South Island?
Cook Strait

What strong alcoholic spirit is distilled from wine or fermented fruit juice?
brandy

What style of architecture or art was characterized by a deliberate plainness, crudity, or violence of imagery, the term first applied to functionalist buildings of the 1950s and 1960s that made much use of steel and concrete in starkly massive blocks?
brutalism

What style of cross-country skiing involves the skis being pushed forward parallel to each other in a motion similar to walking or running?
classic skiing

What substance extracted from red and purple seaweeds consists of polysaccharides and is used as a thickening or emulsifying agent in food products?
carrageenan

What summer residence of the Pope is located on the edge of Lake Albano near Rome?
Castel Gandolfo

What surface is generated by rotating a catenary about its horizontal axis?
catenoid

What surgical operation involves a piece of the colon being diverted to an artificial opening in the abdominal wall to bypass a damaged part of the colon?
colostomy

What synthetic compound of the benzodiazepine class is used as an anticonvulsant and analgesic drug?
carbamazepine

What synthetic drug used in the treatment of asthma and respiratory diseases and also in veterinary obstetrics promotes the growth of muscle and has been used illegally by athletes to enhance performance?
clenbuterol

What synthetic insecticide used to protect crops and in the treatment of fleas and lice has the chemical formula C12H11NO2?
carbaryl

What synthetic non-steroidal drug is used to treat infertility in women by stimulating ovulation?
clomiphene

What syrupy solution of nitrocellulose in a mixture of alcohol and ether is used for coating things, chiefly in surgery and in a former photographic process?
collodion

What system in the European Union established common prices for most agricultural products within the European Union, a single fund for price supports, and levies on imports?
Common Agricultural Policy

What system of physical discipline and movement originated among Brazilian slaves and is treated as a martial art and dance form?
capoeira

What tall fur hat with a coloured cloth flap hanging down on the right-hand side and often a plume on the top is worn by soldiers of certain regiments of hussars and artillerymen?
busby

What technical term is used to describe the rumbling or gurgling noise made by the movement of fluid and gas in the intestines?
borborygmus

What technical term refers to a connected series or chain or a connected series of texts written by early Christian theologians?
catena

What technique for the interpretation of economic history is based on the statistical analysis of large-scale numerical data from population censuses, parish registers, and similar sources?
cliometrics

What technique of controlled breathing named after a Russian physiologist is claimed to alleviate asthma?
Buteyko method

What temporary condition, typically caused by hormonal changes, involves the formation of large brown patches on the skin, mainly on the face?
chloasma

What term describes the separation of a mixture by passing it in solution or suspension or as a vapour through a medium in which the components move at different rates?
chromatography

What term for a French market town shares its name with a town or village under the shadow of a castle?
bourg

What term for a legislative body of ancient or modern Greece comes from the Greek for ``senate''?
boule

What term for a medicated eyewash also refers to a kind of dark eyeshadow used especially in Eastern countries?
collyrium

What term for hell is the name of a place in the Valley of Hinnom near Jerusalem?
Tophet

What term from the Anglo-Latin for ``felon of himself'' refers to suicide?
felo de se

What term from the French for ``railway'' refers to a form of the card game baccarat?
chemin de fer

What term is given to the minimum amount of time needed to stimulate a muscle or nerve fibre, using an electric current twice the strength required to elicit a threshold response?
chronaxie

What term refers to a painless ulcer, particularly one developing on the genitals as a result of venereal disease?
chancre

What term refers to the use of a ring or loop to bind together the ends of an obliquely fractured bone or encircle the opening of a malfunctioning cervix?
cerclage

What term refers to the willingness to secretly allow or be involved in wrongdoing, especially an immoral or illegal act?
connivance

What term, Hebrew for ``priest,'' refers to a member of the priestly class having certain rights and duties in the synagogue?
kohen

What term, medically, refers to the inheritance by two related individuals of the same genetic characteristic, such as susceptibility to a disease, and more generally refers to an alphabetical list of the words present in a text, usually with citations of the passages in which they are found?
concordance

What term, referring to a historical shrill narrow-tubed war trumpet, means in modern English a strongly expressed demand or request for action?
clarion call

What term, sometimes called destructive metabolism, refers to the breakdown of complex molecules in living organisms to form simpler ones, together with the release of energy?
catabolism

What test for infection with a microorganism involves measuring the amount of complement available in serum to bind with an antibody-antigen complex?
complement fixation test

What test made in early pregnancy to detect congenital abnormalities in the fetus involves taking a tiny tissue sample from the threadlike projections of the fetal part of the placenta?
chorionic villus sampling

What theological doctrine posits that the body and blood of Christ are present in the bread and wine of the Eucharist?
concomitance

What theological notion refers to the Word of God or the principle of divine reason and creative order, identified in the Gospel of John with the second person of the Trinity incarnate in Jesus Christ?
Logos

What theology refers to knowledge of God obtained through affirmation?
cataphatic

What therapy for mercury or lead poisoning binds the toxins in the bloodstream by circulating a certain solution?
chelation therapy

What thick-soled boot or buskin was worn by actors in Greek tragedy?
cothurnus

What thin layer of gray matter in each cerebral hemisphere is located between the lentiform nucleus and the insula?
claustrum

What thin tube is inserted into a vein or body cavity to administer medicine, drain off fluid, or insert a surgical instrument?
cannula

What thin weblike veil extends from the edge of the cap to the stalk of toadstools?
cortina

What three languages comprise the Brythonic, or P-Celtic, language group?
Welsh, Cornish, Breton

What three Latin phrases appear on the Great Seal?
E pluribus unum `out of many, one,' Annuit cœptis `providence favours our undertakings,' Novus ordo seclorum `new order of the ages'

What three nations comprise Borneo?
Indonesia (Kalimantan), Malaysia (Sabah, Sarawak), Brunei

What title of Michael J. Knowles means ``extremely bad or unpleasant''?
execrable

What toga with a border of coloured stripes was worn ceremonially by various men of rank in ancient Rome?
trabea

What tough, insoluble protein secreted by mollusks forms the organic matrix of the shell within which calcium carbonate is deposited?
conchiolin

What town in northwestern Italy, in Tuscany, is known for the white marble quarried there since Roman times?
Carrara

What town in the Picardy region of northern France on the Marne River was a major battlefield during World War I and is the site of a monument to the American soldiers who took the town from German occupiers in 1918 and a military cemetery?
Chateau-Thierry

What town in the southwestern Netherlands is noted for a 1566 Compromise in protest against Spanish rule, the 1660 manifesto of Charles II, and a Treaty that ended the Anglo-Dutch war?
Breda

What town is home to the University of North Carolina?
Chapel Hill

What toxic fatty substance secreted by blister beetles causes blistering and has been used in various traditional remedies, including Spanish fly?
cantharidin

What toxic liquid base, 1,5-diaminopentane, is formed by the putrefaction of proteins?
cadaverine

What trademarked term for a man's wide-brimmed hat comes from the Italian fashion house founded in 1857 that manufactured it?
Borsalino

What transparent flammable plastic, made in sheets from camphor and nitrocellulose, was once used for cinematographic film?
celluloid

What transparent fluid occupies the space between the crystalline lens and the cornea of the eye?
aqueous humour

What tribe or suborder of crustaceans is characterized by short abdomens folded toward the ventral surface and includes the true crabs?
brachyura

What tributary of the Vistula in northeastern Poland flows west and southwest into the Bug River?
Narew

What tropical marine mollusk with a spiral shell that may bear long projections and have a flared lip shares its name with the roof of a semicircular apse, shaped like half a dome?
conch

What Turkish city was the capital of the Ottoman Empire from 1326 to 1402?
Bursa

What twining plant with trumpet-shaped flowers may be either an invasive weed or cultivated for its bright flowers, like morning glories?
convolvulus

What two-movement weightlifting exercise involves a weight being raised above the head following an initial lift to shoulder level?
clean and jerk

What type of aria is characterized by a declamatory melodic style?
aria parlante

What type of Christian medieval sculpture depicts Mary and displays the Trinity and Christ when opened from its centre?
Vierge Ouvrante

What type of heavy bridle lacks a bit and has a thick noseband fitted with rings to which a lunge rein may be attached?
cavesson

What type of thickly glazed, typically bluish or purplish gray stoneware was originally made in Honan province, China, during the Song dynasty?
Chün

What type of tumour occurs in the glands of the intestine (especially the appendix) or in the bronchi and abnormally secretes hormones?
carcinoid

What unit of grammatical organization is said to consist of a subject and predicate in traditional grammar?
clause

What unit of heat is defined as the amount of heat needed to raise one pound of water at maximum density through one degree Fahrenheit?
British thermal unit

What upper opening of the stomach is where the esophagus enters?
cardia

What upper part of the nave, choir, and transepts of a large church contains a series of windows, is clear of the roofs of the aisles, and admits light to the central parts of the building?
clerestory

What American boxer known as ``Gentleman Jim'' was world heavyweight champion from 1892 to 1897?
James John Corbett

What American comedian, screenwriter, director, and actor was both writer and director for a number of movies, including The producers (1968) and Young Frankenstein (1974), both of which he later adapted to the stage as musicals?
Mel Brooks

What American diplomat and statesman was the first African American to receive a Nobel Prize (Peace, 1950)?
Ralph Bunche

What American jazz trumpeter was the first musician to win Grammy Awards for both a jazz and a classical recording in 1984, co-founded Jazz at Lincoln Center, served as its artistic director from 1987, and is the brother of saxophonist Branford?
Wynton Marsalis

What American space shuttle exploded 1.5 minutes after launch on 28 January 1986, killing its crew of seven?
Challenger

What American tennis player was the first to win all four Grand Slam singles titles in the same year (1938)?
Don Budge

What vanilla-scented bicyclic lactone with the chemical formula C9H6O2 is found in many plants and was once used for flavouring food?
coumarin

What variety of sweet potato whose name is of Spanish origin has white flesh?
boniato

What variety of sweet potato whose name is of Spanish origin has white flesh?
boniato

What variety of wine grape native to the Veneto region of northeastern Italy is used to make Valpolicella and Bardolino?
corvina

What vegetable extract contains tannin, especially one obtained from the heartwood of an Indian acacia tree, used for tanning and dyeing?
catechu

What verb from a Middle English phrase meaning ``warrant the secure conferment of (something on someone)'' now means to give or grant (something) to (someone) graciously or condescendingly?
vouchsafe

What verb means ``to surround with or as if with a rampart''?
circumvallate

What verb means, with regards to apes, ``to move by using the arms to swing from branch to branch''?
brachiate

What verb, derived from the name of a publisher of an expurgated edition of Shakespeare in 1818, means ``to remove material that is considered improper or offensive from (a text or account),'' especially with the result that the text becomes weaker or less effective?
bowdlerize

What vertical cutting blade is fixed in front of a plowshare?
coulter

What very light pastry made with egg is typically used for eclairs and profiteroles?
choux pastry

What viral infection, characterized by fever and pain in the muscles of the ribs, is named after the Danish island on which it was first described?
Bornholm disease

What vitamin, also called vitamin D3, is a sterol that is formed by the action of sunlight on dehydrocholesterol in the skin, affecting calcium levels and causing rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults when in deficiency?
cholecalciferol

What Vitruvian category of intercolumniation is one of usually four or more diameters and comes from the Greek for ``thin, weak, intermittent''?
araeostyle

What was a carrack?
large merchant ship of a kind operating in European waters in the fourteenth to the seventeenth century

What was a kulak?
peasant in Russia wealthy enough to own a farm and hire labour

What was a pettifogger?
inferior legal practitioner, especially one who dealt with petty cases or employed dubious practices

What was a pillory?
wooden framework with holes for the head and hands, in which an offender was imprisoned and exposed to public abuse

What was Bujumbura, the capital of Burundi, known as until 1962?
Usumbura

What was Charlemagne's Latin name?
Carolus Magnus

What was Chennai's former name?
Madras

What was Gauss's nickname?
Princeps Mathematicorum

What was Malcolm III of Scotland's nickname?
Canmore

What was Michelangelo's last name?
Buonarroti

What was Orenburg's name from 1938 to 1957?
Chkalov

What was Santo Domingo's former name?
Ciudad Trujillo

What was Sucre's former name (1539--1840)?
Chuquisaca

What was the ancient Greek name for Corfu?
Corcyra

What was the ancient name for the Gallipoli peninsula?
Chersonese

What was the first asteroid to be discovered, found by G. Piazzi of Palermo in 1801, and the largest?
Ceres

What was the first name of the Italian violinist and composer Correlli?
Arcangelo

What was the former name for Kozhikode?
Calicut

What was the former name for Sulawesi?
Celebes

What was the former name for Yantai?
Chefoo

What was the pseudonym of Charles Lutwidge Dodgson?
Lewis Carroll

What watertight enclosure is pumped dry to permit construction work below the waterline, as when building bridges or repairing a ship?
cofferdam

What waxy fleshy covering is found at the base of the upper beak in some birds?
cere

What were the Confederate States?
Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia

What were the first names of the two French court portrait painters with the surname Clouet?
Jean, François

What were the names of Columbus's ships in order of size?
Santa María, Pinta, Niña

What whip of imperial Russia was used to inflict punishment, often causing death?
knout

What white powder, used as a purgative and a fungicide, is also called ``mercuric chloride''?
calomel

What white robe was put on a child at baptism?
chrisom

What wicker basket is used in the game of jai alai to catch and throw the ball?
cesta

What wife of Gunther in the Nibelungenlied instigated the murder of Siegfried, and in the Norse versions is a Valkyrie whom Sigurd wins by penetrating the wall of fire behind which she lies in an enchanted sleep?
Brunhild

What winemaking process involves the correction or improvement of must by the addition of calcium carbonate to neutralize acid, or of sugar to increase alcoholic strength?
chaptalization

What winged angelic being described in biblical tradition as attending on God is represented in ancient Middle Eastern art as a lion or bull with eagles' wings and a human face and in traditional Christian angelology as an angel of the second highest order of the ninefold celestial hierarchy?
cherub

What word comes from a diminutive form of the Spanish for ``fleet'' and means a fleet of ships or boats, especially a navy organizational unit consisting of two or more squadrons of small warships?
flotilla

What word coming from the Latin for ``null'' or ``void'' means ``reject or void, especially by legal procedure''?
quash

What word coming from the Latin for ``theft'' means ``attempting to avoid notice or attention, typically because of guilt or a belief that discovery would lead to trouble''?
furtive

What word coming from the name of a braggart in Spenser's The faerie queene refers to ``boastful or arrogant behaviour''?
braggadocio

What word denotes a decorated wooden framework supporting the coffin of a distinguished person during a funeral or while lying in state?
catafalque

What word describes a fish that migrates down rivers to the sea to spawn?
catadromous

What word describes abnormally slow heart action?
bradycardia

What word for a large globular plastic bottle with a narrow neck typically protected by a frame and used for holding acids or other corrosive liquids comes from the Persian for ``large glass flagon''?
carboy

What word for a metal or earthenware pot typically with a funnel-shaped top comes from the Portuguese for ``to spit''?
cuspidor

What word for a police officer's weapon comes from the Old French for ``stump''?
truncheon

What word for a raised platform on which a person stands to make a public speech, receive an award or medal, play music, or conduct an orchestra comes from the Latin for ``beak''?
rostrum

What word for a temporary camp without tents or cover used especially by soldiers or mountaineers probably comes from the Swiss German for ``additional guard at night''?
bivouac

What word for an apparatus used for ramming down the charge of a muzzleloading firearm is also used in similes and metaphors to describe someone's erect or rigid posture?
ramrod

What word for an armed police officer in France and other French-speaking countries also refers to a rock pinnacle on a mountain, occupying and blocking an arête?
gendarme

What word from the Arabic for ``citadel'' refers to the citadel of a North African city or the area surrounding it?
casbah

What word from the Arabic for ``path'' refers to the time at which something is most powerful or successful?
zenith

What word from the ecclesiastical Latin for ``excommunicated person, excommunication'' can be defined as ``something or someone that one vehemently dislikes,'' ``a formal curse by a pope or a council of the Church, excommunicating a person or denouncing a doctrine,'' or, literarily, ``a strong curse''?
anathema

What word from the French for ``bell'' refers to a small translucent cover for protecting or forcing outdoor plants?
cloche

What word from the French for ``expression'' refers to a person's look or manner, especially one of a particular kind indicating their character or mood?
mien

What word from the French for ``ladder'' refers to a level or rank in an organization, a profession, or society?
echelon

What word from the French for ``leaning, inclining'' refers to a strong or habitual liking for something or tendency to do something?
penchant

What word from the French for ``mounted musketeer'' refers to a firearm similar to a lightweight rifle but with a shorter barrel?
carbine

What word from the French meaning ``raw'' or ``rough'' describes an unsweetened, very dry sparkling wine?
brut

What word from the German for ``dripping, lard'' refers to something excessively sentimental and saccharine?
schmaltzy

What word from the Greek for ``dog's tail'' refers to a person or thing that is the centre of attention or admiration?
cynosure

What word from the Greek for ``forgetful'' refers to either a lack of energy and enthusiasm or a pathological state of sleepiness or deep unresponsiveness and inactivity?
lethargy

What word from the Greek for ``shell or potsherd'' means ``exclude (someone) from a society or group''?
ostracize

What word from the Greek for ``well endowed by nature,'' and more specifically a prose romance by John Lyly, refers to an artificial, highly elaborate way of writing or speaking?
euphuism

What word from the Italian for ``person loving the arts'' refers to a person who cultivates an area of interest, such as the arts, without real commitment or knowledge?
dilettante

What word from the Latin ``wiped, polished'' describes something sparing in the use of words and abrupt?
terse

What word from the Latin for ``be dirty'' describes something involving ignoble actions and motives or arousing moral distaste and contempt?
sordid

What word from the Latin for ``cloth from Fostat,'' a suburb of Cairo, means either ``pompous or pretentious speech or writing'' or ``thick, durable twilled cloth with a short nap, usually dyed in dark colours''?
fustian

What word from the Latin for ``craft'' is defined as ``having or showing an ability to accurately assess situations or people and turn this to one's advantage''?
astute

What word from the Latin for ``dish'' denotes a metal container with a sloping hinged lid and a handle used to fetch and store coal for a domestic fire?
scuttle

What word from the Latin for ``divorced, cast off'' means to refuse to accept or be associated with?
repudiate

What word from the Latin for ``dwelling'' + ``make'' is used to refer to a building, especially a large, imposing one, or a system of beliefs?
edifice

What word from the Latin for ``footprint'' means a trace of something that is disappearing or no longer exists?
vestige

What word from the Latin for ``golden'' means ``(of language) highly ornamented or elaborate''?
aureate

What word from the Latin for ``haughty'' describes someone behaving or looking as though one thinks one is superior to others?
supercilious

What word from the Latin for ``made thin'' refers to someone abnormally thin or weak, especially because of illness or a lack of food?
emaciated

What word from the Latin for ``mangled'' means either tear or make deep cuts in (flesh or skin) or criticize forcefully or severely?
lacerate

What word from the Latin for ``moisten'' means ``inspire or permeate with (a feeling or quality)''?
imbue

What word from the Latin for ``opinion'' describes something given to moralizing in a pompous or affected manner?
sententious

What word from the Latin for ``punished'' describes something inflicting or intended as punishment?
punitive

What word from the Latin for ``secretary'' refers to a person authorized to perform certain legal formalities, especially to draw up or certify contracts, deeds, and other documents for use in other jurisdictions?
notary

What word from the Latin for ``secretly'' is defined as ``kept secret or done secretively, especially because illicit''?
clandestine

What word from the Latin for ``to console'' refers to comfort or consolation in a time of distress or sadness?
solace

What word from the Latin for ``to please'' describes something or someone not easily upset or excited or a place or a body of water that is calm and peaceful, with little movement or activity?
placid

What word from the Latin for ``to swell'' means ``swollen'' or ``(especially of language or literary style) pompous or bombastic''?
tumid

What word from the Latin for ``with rounded mouth'' can mean either ``(of the voice or phrasing) full, round, and imposing'' or ``(of writing, style, or expression) pompous or pretentious''?
orotund

What word from the Old French for ``bring back close'' can mean to address (someone) in such a way as to express disapproval or disappointment?
reproach

What word from the Spanish for ``saddlecloth'' functions as a noun to mean ``an ornamental covering spread over a horse's saddle or harness'' or as a verb to mean ``deck out in rich decorative coverings''?
caparison

What word from the Yiddish and Russian for ``devastation'' refers to an organized massacre of a particular ethnic group?
pogrom

What word from the Yiddish for ``dispute, quarrel'' refers to a bitter dispute or feud?
broigus

What word is given to a highly decorated tea urn used in Russia?
samovar

What word is given to blood and other matter discharged from the uterus at menstruation?
catamenia

What word is shared between an ossicle of the middle ear of birds, reptiles, and amphibians and the axis of the spore-producing body of some lower plants?
columella

What word meaning ``directed or moving backward'' or ``degenerate person'' comes from the Latin for ``backwards'' + ``step''?
retrograde

What word meaning ``make more beautiful or attractive'' came from the Latin for ``deck, add lustre''?
adorn

What word of French origin refers to either a small piece of bread or pastry with a savoury topping often served with drinks at a reception or formal party or a sofa, especially a decorative French antique?
canapé

What word of Germanic origin means to accustom an infant or other young mammal to food other than its mother's milk or accustom someone to managing without something on which they have become dependent or of which they have become excessively fond?
wean

What word of Japanese origin refers to a Japanese or Chinese Buddhist monk?
bonze

What word of Japanese origin refers to a Japanese or Chinese Buddhist monk?
bonze

What word of Scandinavian origin refers to a homeless, neglected, or abandoned person, especially a child?
waif

What word of Tamil origin refers to a yacht or other boat with twin hulls in parallel?
catamaran

What word referring to a small pastry with a sweet or savoury filling is French for ``mouthful''?
bouchée

What word referring to something so lacking in originality as to be obvious and boring comes from the French for ``a proclamation or call to arms''?
banal

What word referring to yarn with a looped or curled ply is French for ``buckled, curled''?
bouclé

What word refers to the action by the state or an authority of taking property from its owner for public use or benefit?
expropriation

What word refers to the excessive discharge or buildup of mucus in the nose or throat, associated with inflammation of the mucous membrane?
catarrh

What word refers to the use of a word in a way that is not correct?
catachresis

What word was once used to refer to an Oxford University undergraduate performing menial duties in exchange for assistance from college funds?
servitor

What word which comes from the German for ``replacement'' is defined as ``(of a product) made or used as a substitute, typically an inferior one, for something else'' or ``not real or genuine''?
ersatz

What word which means ``we do not know'' in Latin denotes an ignorant or stupid person?
ignoramus

What word, also a currency, refers to a longing or yearning?
yen

What word, from the Greek for ``colour,'' refers to the purity or intensity of colour?
chroma

What word, originating from the medieval Latin ``full'' + ``power,'' refers to a person, especially a diplomat, invested with the full power of independent action on behalf of their government, typically in a foreign country?
plenipotentiary

What word, perhaps from the French for ``take sides at tennis,'' means to pass on or discuss an idea or rumour in a casual or uninformed way?
bandy

What words did Julius Caesar utter before his death in his eponymous Shakespeare play?
Et tu, Brutè! (3.1.76)

What X-ray examination of the bile ducts is used to locate and identify an obstruction?
cholangiography

What yeastlike parasitic ascomycete sometimes causes thrush?
candida

What yellow giant is the sixth brightest star in the sky and the brightest in the constellation Auriga?
Capella

What Zulu chief (1816--28) reorganized his forces and waged war against many Nguni clans, subjugating them and forming a Zulu empire in southeastern Africa?
Shaka

What Zulu king became ruler of Zululand in 1873, was involved in a series of battles with the Afrikaners and British, and deposed as leader after the capture of his capital by the British in 1879?
Cetshwayo

When did Captain James Cook visit New Zealand?
1769

When did Monteverdi write his opera Orfeo?
1607

When did the Romans destroy Carthage?
146 BC

When is the feast of the Holy Innocents?
28 December

When was Brisbane founded as a penal colony?
1824

Where are Boal wine grapes chiefly grown?
Madeira

Where are the ashes of the cremated dead kept?
cinerarium

Where are the Cairngorm Mountains located?
northern Scotland

Where are the Cardamom Mountains?
Cambodia

Where did Captain James Cook die?
Hawaii

Where did King Arthur hold his court?
Camelot

Where is Cabernet Franc chiefly grown?
Loire Valley, northeastern Italy

Where is Camembert?
Normandy

Where is cantal cheese chiefly made?
Auvergne

Where is Chimborazo?
Ecuador

Where is Connemara?
Galway

Where is the buccinator muscle?
cheek wall

Where was Cabernet Sauvignon chiefly grown?
Bordeaux

Where was Napoleon I born?
Ajaccio, Corsica

Where was the cathedral that Monet painted (1892--95) located?
Rouen

Where was the Chester White developed?
Pennsylvania

Who are the Major Prophets?
Ezekiel, Daniel, Isaiah, Jeremiah

Who assassinated President Abraham Lincoln at Ford's Theatre in Washington, D. C.?
John Wilkes Booth

Who became the first premier of a unified Italy in 1861?
Camillo Benso Cavour

Who composed Samson and Delilah (1877)?
Camille Saint-Saëns

Who designed Brasilia in 1956?
Lúcio Costa

Who discovered the neutron?
Sir James Chadwick

Who is reputed to have committed suicide by allowing herself to be bitten by an asp?
Cleopatra

Who is responsible for preparing the UK's annual budgets?
Chancellor of the Exchequer

Who is said to have built the Kaaba?
Abraham, Ishmael

Who is the Greek goddess of grain and agriculture?
Demeter

Who is the Roman goddess of grain and agriculture?
Ceres

Who led the committee that compiled the Book of Common Prayer?
Thomas Cranmer

Who led the committee that compiled the Book of Common Prayer?
Thomas Cranmer

Who printed the first book in English in 1474?
William Caxton

Who said ``castigat ridendo mores,'' and how does it translate into English?
Jean-Baptiste de Santeul, ``one corrects customs by laughing at them"

Who starred in Fists of fury (1972) and Enter the dragon (1973)?
Bruce Lee

Who succeeded to the presidency of the United States upon the death of Harding in 1923, becoming the thirtieth president of the United States?
Calvin Coolidge

Who was Adolf Hitler's German mistress?
Eva Braun

Who was born Nicholas Breakspear?
Adrian IV

Who was both chief adviser to Charles II and chancellor of Oxford University from 1660 to 1667?
Earl of Clarendon

Who was Canute's father?
Sweyn I

Who was Charlemagne's father: the founder of the Frankish dynasty?
Pepin III

Who was known as ``the young pretender''?
Charles Edward Stuart

Who was known as ``the young pretender''?
Charles Edward Stuart

Who was the Canadian prime minister from 1979 to 1980?
Joe Clark

Who was the commander of the Continental Army?
George Washington

Who was the consort and later the second wife of Louis XIV?
Marquise de Maintenon

Who was the Greek and Roman Muse of history?
Clio

Who was the twin brother of Pollux, of the Dioscuri?
Castor

Who wrote David Copperfield (1850)?
Charles Dickens

Who wrote The descent of man (1871)?
Charles Darwin

Who wrote The Malayan trilogy (1956--59) and Earthly powers (1980)?
Anthony Burgess

Who wrote Troilus and Criseyde (c. 1385)?
Geoffrey Chaucer

Whom did Cavaliers support in the English Civil War?
King Charles I

Whom did Fidel Castro overthrow?
Fulgencio Batista

Whom did Gaddafi overthrow in 1969?
King Idris

Whose subterranean cemetery was once the only one referred to as ``catacombs''?
St. Sebastian

With what anatomical adjective would you describe someone having a relatively broad, short skull?
brachycephalic

With what early spinet with the strings parallel to the keyboard, typically rectangular, and popular in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century houses was John Bull associated?
virginal

With what initialism would Bach sign his compositions?
S. D. G. (soli Deo gloria `glory to God alone')

With what is cappellacci pasta filled?
squash

With what seeds is aquavit flavoured?
caraway

With what was Brunswick stew originally made?
squirrel or rabbit

With whom did Max Born share his Nobel Prize for Physics (1954)?
Walther Bothe

Within what U-shaped or forked metal connector can another part be fastened by means of a bolt or pin passing through the ends of the connector?
clevis

What does the Latin root nar-- mean?
nostril; naris

What does the Greek root narc-- mean?
numb; νάρκη (narkē); narcosis, narcotic

What does the Latin root narr-- mean?
tell; narrare; narrative

What does the Latin root nas-- mean?
nose; nasus; nasal

What do the Latin roots nasc--, nat-- mean?
born; nascere, natus; nascent, native

What does the Greek root naut-- mean?
ship; ναύτης (nautes); Argonaut, astronaut

What does the Latin root nav- mean?
ship; navis; naval

What does the Greek root ne-- mean?
new; νέος (neos); neologism

What does the Greek root necr-- mean?
dead; νεκρός (nekros); necrophobia

What does the Greek root nect-- mean?
swimming; νηκτός (nēktos); nectopod

What do the Latin roots nect--, nex-- mean?
join, tie; nectere, nexus; connect, connexion

What does the Latin root neg-- mean?
say no; negare; negative

What does the Greek root nema-- mean?
hair; νῆμα (nēma); nematode

What does the Latin root nemor-- mean?
grove, woods; nemus, nemoris; nemoral

What does the Greek root nephr-- mean?
kidney; νεφρός (nephros); nephritis

What does the Greek root nes-- mean?
island; νῆσος (nēsos); Polynesia

What does the Greek root neur-- mean?
nerve; νευρών (neurōn); neurology, neurosurgeon

What does the Latin root nict-- mean?
wink; nictari; nictation

What does the Latin root nigr- mean?
black; niger; denigrate

What does the Latin root nihil-- mean?
nothing; nihilum; annihilation

What does the Latin root noct-- mean?
night; nox, noctis; noctambulist, nocturnal

What does the Latin root nod- mean?
knot; nodus; node, nodule

What does the Greek root nom-- mean?
arrangement, law; νόμος (nomos); autonomous, taxonomy

What does the Greek root nomad-- mean?
those who let pasture herds; νομάς, νομάδος (nomas, nomados); nomadic

What does the Latin root nomin-- mean?
name; nomen, nominis; nomination

What does the Latin root non-- mean?
not; non; none

What does the Latin root non-- mean?
ninth; nonus; nonary

What does the Latin root nonagen-- mean?
ninety each; nonageni; nonagenary

What does the Latin root nonagesim-- mean?
ninetieth; nonagesimus; nonagesimal

What does the Latin root not-- mean?
letter, note, paper; notare; annotation, notable

What does the Greek root noth-- mean?
spurious; νόθος (nothos); nothogenus

What does the Greek root noto-- mean?
back, south; νότος (notos); notochord

What does the Latin root nov-- mean?
nine; novem; November, novennial

What does the Latin root nov-- mean?
new; novus; innovation, nova

What does the Latin root noven-- mean?
nine each; noveni; novenary

What does the Latin root novendec-- mean?
nineteen; novendecim

What do the Latin roots nox--, noc-- mean?
harmful; noxa; noxious

What does the Latin root nu-- mean?
nod; nuere; innuendo

What does the Latin root nub-- mean?
to marry, to wed; nubes, nubis, nubere; connubial, nubile

What does the Latin root nuc-- mean?
nut; nux, nucis; nucleus

What does the Latin root nuch-- mean?
back of neck; nucha; nuchal cord

What does the Latin root nud-- mean?
naked; nudus; denude, nudity

What does the Latin root null-- mean?
none; nullus; nullify

What does the Latin root numer-- mean?
number; numerus; numeral

What does the Latin root nunci-- mean?
announce; nuntius; pronunciation

What does the Latin root nupti-- mean?
nuptial

What does the Latin root nutri-- mean?
nourish; nutrire; nutrient

What do the Latin roots ob--, o--, oc--, of--, og--, op--, os-- mean?
against; ob; obstinate, obstreperous, occur, offend, omit, oppose, ostentatious

What does the Greek root oct-- mean?
eight; ὀκτώ (oktō); octagon, octahedron, octode

What does the Latin root oct-- mean?
eight; octō; octangular, octennial, octovir

What does the Latin root octav-- mean?
eighth; octāvus; octaval

What does the Latin root octogen-- mean?
eighty each; octogeni; octogenary

What does the Latin root octogesim-- mean?
eightieth; octogesimus; octogesimal

What does the Latin root octon-- mean?
eight each; octoni; octonary

What does the Latin root ocul-- mean?
eye; oculus, oculare; ocular, oculus, ullage

What does the Greek root od-- mean?
path, way; ὁδός (hodos); anode, diode, odometer, pentode, tetrode, triode

What does the Latin root od-- mean?
hate; odium; odious

What does the Greek root odont-- mean?
tooth; ὀδούς, ὀδόντος (odous, odontos); odontology

What does the Latin root odor-- mean?
fragrant; odor; odorous

What does the Greek root oeco-- mean?
house; οἶκος (oikos); ecology

What does the Greek root oed-- mean?
swollen; οἴδημα (oidēma); oedema

What does the Greek root oen-- mean?
wine; οἶνος (oinos); oenology

What does the Greek root oesophag-- mean?
gullet; οἰσοφάγος (oisophagos); oesophagus

What does the Greek root ogdo-- mean?
eighth; ὄγδοος (ogdoos); ogdoad

What does the Greek root --oid mean?
like; --οειδής (--oeidēs); asteroid, mucoid, organoid

What does the Latin root ole-- mean?
oil; oleum; oleosity

What does the Latin from Greek root olecran-- mean?
skull of elbow; ὠλέκρανον (ōlekranon); olecranon

What does the Greek root olig-- mean?
few; ὀλίγος (oligos); oligarchy

What does the Latin root oliv-- mean?
olive; oliva; olivaceous, olivary, olivette

What does the Greek root --oma mean?
cancer; --ωμα; melanoma

What does the Latin root omas-- mean?
paunch; omasum; omasum

What does the Latin root oment-- mean?
fat skin; omentum; omental

What does the Latin root omin- mean?
creepy; omen, ominis; abominable, ominous

What does the Greek root omm-- mean?
eye; ὄμμα (omma); ommatidium

What does the Latin root omni-- mean?
all; omnis; omnipotence, omnivore

What does the Latin root omo-- mean?
shoulder; omphal--; navel; Greek; ὀμφαλός (omphalos); omphalectomy

What does the Latin root oner-- mean?
burden; onus, oneris; exonerate, onerous

What does the Greek root onom-- mean?
name; όνομα (onoma); onomatopoeia

What does the Greek root ont-- mean?
existing; ὄντος (ontos); ontogeny, ontology

What does the Greek root --onym mean?
name; ὄνυμα (onuma); antonym, pseudonym, synonym

What does the Greek root oo-- mean?
egg; (oion); oocyte

What does the Latin root opac-- mean?
shady; opacus; opacity

What does the Latin root oper-- mean?
work; opus, operis; inoperable, opera

What does the Latin root opercul-- mean?
little cover; operculum

What does the Greek root ophi-- mean?
snake; ὄφις (ophis); ophiophagy

What does the Greek root ophthalm-- mean?
eye; ὀφθαλμός (ophthalmos); ophthalmology

What does the Greek root opisth-- mean?
behind; ὄπισθεν (opisthen); opisthosoma, opsimath

What does the Greek root opoter-- mean?
either; ὁπότερος (hopoteros)

What does the Greek root opt-- mean?
eye; ὀπτός (optos); optical

What does the Latin root opt-- mean?
choose; optare; adopt, optional

What does the Latin root optim-- mean?
best; optimus; optimum

What does the Latin root or-- mean?
mouth; os, oris; oral, orator

What does the Latin root orb-- mean?
circle; orbis; orbit

What does the Greek root orch-- mean?
testicle; ὄρχις (orchis); orchid

What does the Latin root ordin-- mean?
order; ōrdō, ordinis; ordinal, ordinary

What does the Greek root organ-- mean?
organ, instrument, tool; ὄργανον (organon); organism

What do the Latin roots ori--, ort-- mean?
eastern; oriri, ortus; orient

What does the Latin root orn-- mean?
decorate; ōrnāre; adorn, ornament, ornate

What does the Greek root ornith-- mean?
bird; ὄρνις (ornis, ornithos); ornithology

What does the Greek root orth-- mean?
straight; ὀρθός (orthos); orthodontist, orthodoxy, orthosis

What does the Latin root oscill-- mean?
swing; oscillum; oscillation

What does the Latin root oss-- mean?
bone; os, ossis; ossification

What does the Greek root osteo-- mean?
bone; ὀστοῦν (ostoun); osteoporosis

What does the Latin root osti-- mean?
entrance; ostium; ostiole

What does the Greek root ostrac-- mean?
shell; ὄστρακον (ostrakon); ostracism

What does the Greek root ot-- mean?
ear; οὖς, ωτός (ous, ōtos); otology

What does the Latin root ov-- mean?
egg; ovum; oval, ovary, ovule

What does the Latin root ovi-- mean?
sheep; ovis; ovine

What does the Greek root oxy-- mean?
sharp, pointed; ὀξύς (oxus); oxygen, oxymoron

What does the Latin root pac-- mean?
peace; pax, pacis; pacifism

What does the Greek root pach-- mean?
thick; παχύς (pachus); pachydermata, Pachypodium

What does the Greek root paed-- mean?
child; παῖς, παιδός (pais, paidos); paediatric

What does the Latin root pagin-- mean?
page; pagina; pagination

What does the Latin root pal-- mean?
stake; palus; impalement, pale

What do the Greek roots palae--, pale-- mean?
ancient, old; παλαιός (palaios); paleontology

What does the Greek root palin- mean?
back; πάλιν (palin); palindrome

What does the Latin root pall-- mean?
be pale; pallere; pallid, pallor

What does the Latin root palli-- mean?
mantle; pallium; pallium

What does the Latin root palm-- mean?
palm; palma; palmate

What does the Latin root palustr-- mean?
in marshes; paluster; palustral

What do the Greek roots pan--, pam-- mean?
all; πᾶς, παντός (pas, pantos); pandemic

What do the Latin roots pand-, pans- mean?
spread; pandere, pansus; expand, expansion

What does the Greek root par(a)-- mean?
beside, near; παρά (para); parallel, parameter

What does the Latin root pariet-- mean?
wall; paries, parietis; parietal

What does the Latin root part-- mean?
part; pars, partis; bipartite, partition

What does the Greek root parthen-- mean?
maiden; παρθένος (parthenos); parthenogenesis

What does the Latin root parv-- mean?
little; parvus; parvovirus

What do the Latin roots pasc--, past-- mean?
feed; pascere, pastus; pasture, repast

What does the Latin root pass-- mean?
pace, step; passus

What does the Latin root passer-- mean?
sparrow; passer; passeriform, passerine

What does the Latin root pat-- mean?
be open; patere; patent

What does the Greek root path-- mean?
feel, hurt; πάθος (pathos); pathetic, pathology

What do the Latin roots pati--, pass-- mean?
suffer, feel, endure, permit; pati, passus; passive, patience

What does the Greek root patr-- mean?
father; πατήρ, πατριά (patēr, patria); patriarch

What does the Latin root patr-- mean?
father; pater, patris; patrilocal

What does the Latin root pauc-- mean?
few; paucus; paucal, pauciloquent, paucity

What does the Latin root pav-- mean?
pavire; pavement

What does the Latin root pecc-- mean?
sin; peccare; impeccable

What does the Greek root pect-- mean?
fixed; πηκτός (pēktos); pectic, pectin

What does the Latin root pector-- mean?
chest; pectus, pectoris; pectoral

What does the Latin root pecun-- mean?
money; pecunia; pecuniary

What does the Greek root ped-- mean?
child; παῖς, παιδός (pais, paidos); pedagogy

What does the Latin root ped-- mean?
foot; pes, pedis; pedal, quadruped

What does the Latin root pejor-- mean?
worse; pejor; pejorative

What do the Latin roots pell--, puls-- mean?
drive; pellere, pulsus; propellent, propulsor, repellent

What does the Latin root pen-- mean?
almost; paene; peninsula, penultimate, penumbra

What do the Latin roots pend--, pens-- mean?
hang; pendere; suspend

What do the Latin roots penn--, pinn-- mean?
feather; penna; pennate, pinnate

What does the Greek root pent-- mean?
five; πέντε (pente); pentagon, pentode, pentagrid

What does the Greek root pentecost-- mean?
fiftieth; πεντηκοστός (pentēkostos); pentecostalism

What does the Greek root pept-- mean?
to digest; πέσσειν, πεπτός (pessein, peptos); peptic, peptide

What does the Latin root per-- mean?
thoroughly, through; per; perfection, permeate, persistence, pervade

What does the Greek root peran- mean?
across, beyond; πέραν (peran)

What does the Greek root peri-- mean?
around; περί (peri); perimeter, peripheral, periscope

What does the Greek root persic-- mean?
peach; περσικός (persikos)

What does the Latin root pessim-- mean?
worst; pessimus; pessimal

What does the Latin root pet- mean?
strive towards; petere; appetite, competition

What does the Greek root petr-- mean?
rock; πέτρα (petra); petroglyph

What does the Greek root phae-- mean?
dark; φαιός (phaios); phaeomelanin

What does the Greek root phag-- mean?
eat; φαγεῖν (phagein); sarcophagus

What does the Greek root phalang-- mean?
close formation of troops, finger bones; φάλαγξ, φάλαγγος (phalanx, phalangos); phalanges

What does the Greek root phalar-- mean?
having a patch of white; φάλαρος (phalāros); phalarope

What does the Greek root pharmac-- mean?
drug, medicine; φάρμακον (pharmakon); pharmacy

What does the Greek root phaner-- mean?
visible; φανερός (phaneros); phanerozoic

What does the Greek root pher-- mean?
bear, carry; φέρω (pherō); pheromone

What do the Greek roots phil--, --phile mean?
love, friendship; φιλέω (phileō, philia); hydrophile, philosophy

What does the Greek root phleg-- mean?
heat; φλέγω (phlegō); phlegm, phlegmatics

What does the Greek root phloe-- mean?
tree bark; φλοιός (phloios); phlobaphene, phloem

What does the Greek root phob-- mean?
fear; φόβος (phobos); hydrophobia

What does the Greek root phon- mean?
sound; φωνή (phōnē); homophone, microphone, phonograph

What does the Greek root phor-- mean? *****
carry, bear; φόρος (phoros); metaphor

What do the Greek roots phos-, phot- mean?
light; φῶς, φωτός (phōs, phōtos); phosphor, photograph

What does the Greek root phragm-- mean?
fence; φράγμα (phragma); diaphragm

What does the Greek root phren-- mean?
diaphragm, mind; φρήν, φρενός (phrēn, phrenos); phrenetic, schizophrenia

What does the Greek root phryn-- mean?
toad, toad-like; φρύνη (phrunē); Phrynobatrachus

What does the Greek root phyl-- mean?
tribe; φύλον (phulon); phylogenetics, phylum

What does the Greek root phyll-- mean?
leaf; φύλλον (phullon); chlorophyll, phyllotaxis

What does the Greek root phys-- mean?
nature; φύσις (phusis); physics

What does the Greek root physalid-- mean?
bladder; φυσαλ(λ)ίς (phusal(l)is); physalis

What does the Greek root phyt-- mean?
plant; φυτόν (phuton); neophyte, phytoplankton

What does the Latin root pic-- mean?
pitch; pix, picis

What does the Latin root pil-- mean?
hair; pilus; depilatory, epilator

What does the Greek root pin-- mean?
drink; πίνειν (pinein); pinocytosis

What does the Latin root pin-- mean?
pine; pinus; pineal gland

What do the Latin roots ping--, pict-- mean?
paint; pingere, pictus; depiction, picture

What does the Latin root pingu-- mean?
fat; pinguis; Pinguicula

What does the Latin root pir-- mean?
pear; pirus; piriformis muscle

What does the Latin root pisc-- mean?
fish; piscis; Pisces, piscivore

What does the Greek root pis-- mean?
pea; πίσος (pisos)

What does the Greek root plac- mean?
plate, tablet; πλάξ, πλακός (plax, plakos)

What does the Latin root plac-- mean?
calm; placare, placatus; placate

What do the Latin roots plac--, --plic-- mean?
please; placēre, placitus; placebo, placid

What does the Greek root plagi-- mean?
oblique; πλάγιος (plagios); plagioclase

What does the Latin root plan-- mean?
flat; planus; explanation, planar, plane

What do the Latin roots plang--, planct-- mean?
plangere, planctus; plangent

What does the Greek root plas-- mean?
mould; πλάθω (plathō); plasma, plastic

What does the Greek root platy-- mean?
flat, broad; πλατύς (platus); platypus, Platyhelminthes

What do the Latin roots plaud--, --plod--, plaus--, --plos-- mean?
approve, clap; plaudere, plausus; applaud, applause, explosion, implode, plaudits, plausible

What do the Latin roots ple--, plet-- mean?
fill; plere; complement, suppletion

What does the Latin root pleb-- mean?
people; plebs, plebis; plebian, plebs

What does the Greek root plec-- mean?
interwoven; πλέκω (plekō); plectics, symplectomorphism

What do the Latin roots plect--, plex-- mean?
plait; plectere, plexus; perplex

What does the Latin root plen-- mean?
full; plenus; plenary

What does the Greek root plesi-- mean?
near; πλησίος (plēsios)

What does the Greek root pleth-- mean?
full; πλῆθος (plēthos); plethora

What does the Greek root pleur-- mean?
side; πλευρά (pleura)

What does the Latin root plic-- mean?
fold; plicare, plicatus; duplication, replicate

What does the Greek root plinth-- mean?
brick; πλίνθος (plinthos)

What does the Latin root plor-- mean?
plorare; implore

What does the Latin root plu-- mean?
rain; pluere

What does the Latin root plum-- mean?
feather; pluma; plumage, plumate

What does the Latin root plumb-- mean?
lead; plumbum; plumber

What does the Latin root plur-- mean?
more; pluris; plural

What does the Latin root plurim-- mean?
most; plurimus

What does the Latin root plus-- mean?
more; plus; surplus

What does the Greek root plut-- mean?
wealth; πλοῦτος (ploutos); plutocracy

What does the Latin root pluvi-- mean?
rain; pluvia; pluvial

What does the Greek root pneu-- mean?
air, lung; πνεῦμα (pneuma); pneumatic

What does the Greek root pod-- mean?
foot; πούς, ποδός (pous, podos); podiatry, tripod

What does the Greek root pogon-- mean?
beard; πώγων, πώγωνος (pōgōn, pōgōnos); pogonotrophy

What does the Greek root poie-- mean?
make; ποιέω (poieō); poiesis

What does the Greek root pol-- mean?
pole; πόλος (polos); dipole, polar

What do the Greek roots pole--, poli-- mean?
city; πόλις (polis); metropolis, politics

What does the Greek root polem-- mean?
war; πόλεμος (polemos); polemic

What does the Greek root poli-- mean?
grey; πολιός (polios)

What does the Latin root pollic-- mean?
thumb; pollex, pollicis

What does the Latin root pollin-- mean?
pollen, pollinis; pollination

What does the Greek root poly-- mean?
many; πολύς (polus); polygon

What do the Latin roots pon--, posit-- mean?
put; ponere, positus; component, position, postpone

What does the Latin root ponder-- mean?
weight; pondus, ponderis; preponderance

What does the Latin root pont-- mean?
bridge; pons, pontis; pontoon

What does the Latin root popul-- mean?
people; populus, populare; population

What does the Greek root por-- mean?
passage; πόρος (poros); pore

What does the Latin root porc-- mean?
pig; porcus; porcine, pork

What does the Greek root porphyr-- mean?
purple; πορφύρα (porphura); porphyrin

What does the Latin root port-- mean?
gate; porta; portal

What does the Latin root port-- mean?
carry; portare, portatus; export, transportation

What does the Latin root post-- mean?
after, behind; post; posterior, postscript

What does the Latin root pot-- mean?
drink; potus, potare; potable

What does the Greek root potam-- mean?
river; ποταμός (potamos); hippopotamus, Mesopotamia

What does the Greek root prasin-- mean?
leek-green; πράσινος (prasinos); prasinous

What does the Latin root prat-- mean?
meadow; pratum

What does the Latin root prav-- mean?
crooked; pravus; depravity

What does the Latin root pre-- mean?
before; prae; previous

What does the Latin root prec-- mean?
pray; prex, precis, precāri; deprecation

What does the Latin root pred-- mean?
praeda, praedari; predator

What do the Latin roots prehend--, prend--, prehens-- mean?
grasp; prehendere, prehensus; comprehend

What do the Latin roots prem--, --prim--, press-- mean?
press; premere, pressus; pressure

What does the Greek root presby-- mean?
old; πρέσβυς (presbus); Presbyterianism

What does the Latin root preter-- mean?
past; praeter; preterite, pretermission

What does the Latin root preti-- mean?
price; pretium, pretiare

What does the Latin root prim-- mean?
first; primus; primary, primeval, primitive

What does the Latin root prior-- mean?
former; prior; priority

What does the Latin root priv(i)-- mean?
separate; privus, privare, privatus; deprivation, privilege

What does the Greek root pro-- mean?
before, in front of; πρό (pro)

What does the Latin root pro-- mean?
for, forward; pro; propulsion

What does the Latin root prob-- mean?
try; probus, probare; probation

What does the Greek root proct-- mean?
anus; πρωκτός (prōktos); proctology

What does the Latin root propri-- mean?
one's own, ownership; proprietas; appropriate, property, propriety

What does the Greek root pros-- mean?
forward; πρός (pros)

What does the Greek root prot-- mean?
first; πρῶτος (prōtos); protoplasm

What does the Latin root proxim-- mean?
nearest; proximus, proximare; approximate, proximity

What does the Latin root prun-- mean?
plum; prunus; prune

What does the Greek root psamma-- mean?
sand; ψάμμος (psammos)

What does the Greek root pseud-- mean?
false; ψευδής (pseudēs); pseudonym

What does the Greek root psil-- mean?
bare; ψιλός (psilos); epsilon

What does the Greek root psych-- mean?
mind; ψυχή (psuchē); psycho

What does the Greek root psychr-- mean?
cold; ψυχρός (psuchros)

What does the Greek root pter-- mean?
wing, fern; πτερόν (pteron); helicopter

What does the Greek root pto-- mean?
fall; πτῶσις (ptōsis); ptosis

What does the Greek root ptyal-- mean?
saliva; πτύον (ptuon)

What does the Greek root ptych-- mean?
fold, layer; πτύξ, πτυχή (ptuchē); triptych

What does the Latin root pub-- mean?
sexually mature; pubes; pubescent, pubic

What does the Latin root public-- mean?
publicus; publication

What does the Latin root pude-- mean?
pudere; impudent

What does the Latin root pugn-- mean?
fight; pugna, pugnare; pugnacious, repugnant

What does the Latin root pulchr-- mean?
beautiful; pulcher, pulchri; pulchritude

What does the Latin root pulmon-- mean?
lung; pulmo, pulmonis; pulmonary

What does the Latin root pulver-- mean?
dust; pulvis, pulveris; pulverize

What do the Latin roots pung--, punct-- mean?
prick; pungere, punctus; puncture, pungent

What does the Latin root puni-- mean?
punish; punire, punitus; impunity, punitive

What does the Latin root pup-- mean?
doll; pupa; pupa, puppet

What does the Latin root pur-- mean?
pure; purus; impurity, purify

What does the Latin root purg-- mean?
cleanse; purgare; expurgate, purgatory, purge

What does the Latin root purpur-- mean?
purple; purpura

What does the Latin root put-- mean?
prune, reckon; putāre; compute, putative

What does the Greek root pyg-- mean?
rump; πυγή (pugē); pygostyle, callipygian

What does the Greek root pyl-- mean?
gate; πυλών, πυλῶνος (pulōn); pylon

What does the Greek root pyr-- mean?
heat, fire; πῦρ, πυρός (pur, puros); pyrolysis

What does the Latin root quadr-- mean?
four; quattuor; quadrangle, quadrillion

What does the Latin root quadragen-- mean?
forty each; quadrageni; quadragenary

What does the Latin root quadragesim-- mean?
fortieth; quadragesimus; quadragesimal

What does the Latin root quart-- mean?
fourth; quartus; quartary, quartile

What does the Latin root quasi-- mean?
as if; quasi; quasar

What does the Latin root quatern-- mean?
four each; quaterni; quaternary, quaternion

What do the Latin roots quati--, quass-- mean?
shake; quatere

What do the Latin roots quer--, --quir--, quesit--, --quisit-- mean?
search, seek; quaerere; Inquisition, query

What does the Latin root qui-- mean?
rest; quies; quiet, requiem

What does the Latin root quin-- mean?
five each; quini; quinary

What does the Latin root quindecim-- mean?
fifteenth; quindecimus; quindecimal

What does the Latin root quinden-- mean?
fifteen each; quindeni; quindenary

What does the Latin root quinque-- mean?
five; quinque; quinquennium

What does the Latin root quint-- mean?
fifth; quintus; quintary, quintile

What does the Latin root quot-- mean?
how many, how great; quota, quotient

What is the anatomical term for the hipbone or hip joint?
coxa

What is the segment nearest the body in the leg of an arthropod, especially a crustacean, called?
coxopodite

What is the steersman of a ship's boat, lifeboat, racing boat, or other boat called?
coxswain

What state is known as the Coyote State?
South Dakota

What is another term for nutria?
coypu

What literary term refers to the practice of deception or trickery?
cozenage

What word refers to a vineyard or group of vineyards in France, especially one of recognized quality?
cru

What pair of ligaments in the knee cross each other and connect the femur to the tibia?
cruciate ligaments

What is the cabbage family?
Brassicaceae

If a plant is cruciferous, what kind of plant is it?
cabbage

What are the four basic operations of data storage?
create, read, update, delete

What medieval wind instrument with an enclosed double reed and an upward-curving end produces an even, nasal sound?
krummhorn

What two symmetrical tracts of nerve fibres at the base of the midbrain link the pons and the cerebral hemispheres?
crura cerebri (singular crus cerebri)

What noun refers to an elongated part of an anatomical structure, especially one which occurs in the body as a pair?
crus

What was the basic monetary unit of Brazil from 1988 to 1990?
cruzado

What was the basic monetary unit of Brazil from 1990 to 1993?
cruzeiro

What branch of biology deals with the properties of organisms and tissues at low temperatures?
cryobiology

What protein that occurs in the blood in certain disorders can be precipitated out of solution below ten degrees Celsius, causing obstruction in the fingers and toes?
cryoglobulin

What underground room or vault beneath a church is used as a chapel or burial place?
crypt

What dated botanical term referred to a plant that had no true flowers or seeds, including ferns, mosses, liverworts, lichens, algae, and fungi?
cryptogam

In what condition does one or both of the testes fail to descend from the abdomen into the scrotum?
cryptorchidism

In what period did rocks contain no, or only slight, traces of living organisms?
Precambrian

What large building of prefabricated iron and glass resembling a giant greenhouse, designed by Joseph Paxton for the Great Exhibition of 1851 in Hyde Park, London, and re-erected at Sydenham near Croydon, was accidentally burned down in 1936?
Crystal Palace

What Hungarian dance has a slow introduction and a fast, wild finish?
csardas

What comblike structure, especially a respiratory organ or gill in a mollusk, consists of an axis with a row of projecting filaments?
ctenidium

What small phylum of aquatic invertebrates comprises the comb jellies?
Ctenophora

What is a matador's team of assistants, including picadors and banderilleros, called?
cuadrilla

What small guitar, typically with four or five single or paired strings, is used in Latin American and Caribbean folk music, especially in Puerto Rico?
cuatro

What cocktail typically contains cola, lime juice, rum, and a garnish of lime?
Cuba libre

Where is the cubital vein?
elbow

What is the fifth longitudinal vein from the anterior edge of an insect's wing called?
cubitus

What Latin phrase, meaning ``to the city and to the world,'' denotes a papal address and apostolic blessing occurring on solemn occasions such as Easter and Christmas?
Urbi et Orbi

What are the nine Heegner numbers?
1, 2, 3, 7, 11, 19, 43, 67, 163

What are the first six terms of the $q$-expansion of the $j$-invariant?
$q^{-1} + 744 + 196884q + 21493760q^2 + 864299970q^3 + 20245856256q^4$

What Colombian industrial and commercial city in the Andes, near the Venezuelan border, was founded as a parish in 1733?
Cúcuta

What family comprises the gourds?
Cucurbitaceae

In bridge, what bid is intended to give specific information about the content of the hand to the bidder's partner, for example, possession of a control in the opponents' suit?
cue bid

What Andean city in southern Ecuador was founded in 1557 and known as ``the marble city'' because of its many fine buildings?
Cuenca

What high-altitude resort town in central Mexico is the capital of the state of Morelos?
Cuernavaca

What geological term from the Spanish for ``slope'' refers to a ridge with a gentle dip on one side and a steep scarp on the other?
cuesta

What early angular form of the Arabic alphabet is found chiefly in decorative inscriptions?
Kufic

What Latin exclamation translates to ``to whom is it a benefit?'' usually referring to a crime?
cui bono?

What artificial ventilator encloses the body, leaving the limbs free, and forces air in and out of the lungs by changes in pressure?
cuirass

What historical piece of armour consisted of breastplate and backplate fastened together?
cuirass

What was a piece of armour for the thigh called?
cuisse

Who revolutionized the game of contract bridge by formalizing a system of bidding?
Ely Culbertson

Of what mass of stones, broken shells, and grit is an oyster bed formed?
cultch

What Irish or Scottish monks of the eighth to twelfth centuries lived as a recluse, usually in a group of thirteen?
Culdees

What genus of mosquito includes many kinds commonly found in cooler regions that do not transmit malaria but can pass on various other parasites, including those causing filariasis?
Culex

What city in north-western Mexico is the capital of Sinaloa?
Culiacán Rosales

What series of Carboniferous strata in southwestern England is mainly shale and limestone with some thin coal seams?
Culm

What name is shared between the upper ridge of a bird's bill and a small region in the brain on the anterior surface of the cerebellum?
culmen

What name was given to each of three sisters, Stheno, Euryale, and Medusa, with snakes for hair, who had the power to turn anyone who looked at them to stone?
Gorgon

Who are the three Gorgons?
Euryale, Medusa, Stheno

What Aztec goddess gave birth to the moon, stars, and Huītzilōpōchtli, the god of the sun and war?
Coatlicue

What goddess of ancient Egypt, the benevolent protectress of fertility and childbirth, was associated with the nursing of infants and depicted with the head of a hippopotamus standing upright, the tail of a crocodile, and the claws of a lion?
Ta-Urt

What Egyptian goddess with the forequarters of a lion, the hindquarters of a hippopotamus, and the head of a crocodile devoured the unjust?
Am-mit

What most terrifying Hindu goddess, the wife of Shiva, is often identified with Durga and depicted as black, naked, old, hideous, and sometimes with eight arms?
Kali

(1768--93) What French political assassin assassinated revolutionary leader Jean Paul Marat in his bath in 1793 and was found guilty of treason and guillotined four days later?
Charlotte Corday

What form of hemoglobin is measured to determine one's blood sugar levels?
glycated hemoglobin (hemoglobin A1c)

What name for a small territorial and administrative district forming the most local level of government in the Philippines comes from the Tagalog for ``neighbourhood''?
barangay

What knee-length trousers are cut with full legs to resemble a skirt?
culottes

What sixteenth- or seventeenth-century cannon had a relatively long barrel for its bore, typically about ten to thirteen feet long?
culverin

What is the Latin term for ``with a grain of salt''?
cum grano salis

What does ``cum laude'' mean?
with praise

What historic port city and capital of Sucre state in Venezuela is located on the Manzanares River and said to be the oldest European settlement in South America?
Cumaná

What historic pass through the Appalachian Mountains runs from southwestern Virginia to southeastern Kentucky?
Cumberland Gap

What county in northwestern England with its county town in Carlisle was an ancient British kingdom and formed as a county in 1974, largely from the former counties of Westmorland and Cumberland?
Cumbria

What liquid hydrocarbon made catalytically from benzene, chiefly as an intermediate in phenol synthesis, has the chemical formula C6H5CH(CH3)2?
cumene/isopropyl benzene

What word of Urdu-Persian origin refers to a sash worn around the waist, especially as part of a man's evening clothes?
cummerbund

What cloud forms a towering mass with a flat base at fairly low altitude and often a flat top, as in thunderstorms?
cumulonimbus

What cloud forms rounded masses heaped on each other above a flat base at fairly low altitude?
cumulus

(1787--1865) What Canadian-born British shipowner founded the steamship company that still bears his name with the aid of a contract to carry the mail between Britain and Canada? The first such voyage for the company was made in 1840.
Sir Samuel Cunard

What rare c-word refers to the action or an instance of delaying?
cunctation

What is something wedge-shaped called?
cuneate

What English chieftain and powerful ruler made the town of Camulodunum (Colchester) his capital and established a mint?
Cymbeline

In what shallow, porous container can gold or silver be refined or assayed by melting with a blast of hot air, which oxidizes lead or other base metals?
cupel

What is the Greek equivalent of Cupid?
Eros

What complex ion, Cu(NH3)4 (2+), formed in solution when ammonia is added to copper salts, is deep blue as a solution and used to dissolve cellulose?
cuprammonium

What is the chief town of Curaçao?
Willemstad

What was the largest island in the Netherlands Antilles?
Curaçao

What name is given to a tropical Asian plant of a genus that includes turmeric, zedoary, and other species that yield spices, dyes, and medicinal products?
curcuma

What name is given to a parish priest in a French-speaking country or region?
curé

What surgical instrument is used to remove material by a scraping action, especially from the uterus?
curette

What is the name of the papal court at the Vatican by which the Roman Catholic Church is governed and which comprises various Congregations, Tribunals, and other commissions and departments?
Curia

What southern Brazilian city is the capital of Paraná?
Curitiba

Family Compositae, what edible Mediterranean plant's bitter leaves may be blanched and used in salads?
endive

What were the first names of Currier and Ives?
Nathaniel, James

With what adjective is something described if it has a curved beak?
curvirostral

Complete the proverb: ``Curiosity killed the [---].''
cat

Who was the eldest son of Ham?
Cush

What metabolic disorder caused by overproduction of corticosteroid hormones by the adrenal cortex often involves obesity and high blood pressure?
Cushing's syndrome

What group of Afro-Asiatic languages is found mainly in Ethiopia and Somalia and includes Somali and Oromo?
Cushitic

Where was Custer's Last Stand?
Little Bighorn

When is St. Cuthbert's feast day?
20 March

What waxy, water-repellent substance occurring in the cuticle of plants consists of highly polymerized esters of fatty acids?
cutin

What long, slender marine fish with sharp teeth and a dorsal fin running the length of the back is named after a weapon it resembles?
cutlassfish

What was the only survivor of the British tea clippers, launched in 1869 and now preserved as a museum ship at Greenwich, London?
Cutty Sark

What straight-sided, optically clear container is used for holding liquid samples in a spectrophotometer or another instrument?
cuvette

(1769--1832) What French naturalist founded palaeontology?
Georges Cuvier

Contradictory to its name, what volatile and strongly acidic liquid is actually colourless and has the chemical formula HOCN?
cyanic acid

What vitamin found in foods of animal origin such as liver, fish, and eggs, a deficiency of which can cause pernicious anemia, is also called ``vitamin B12''?
cyanocobalamin

What colourless, flammable, poisonous gas has the chemical formula C2N2?
cyanogen

What name is given to a bluish discoloration of the skin resulting from poor circulation or inadequate oxygenation of the blood?
cyanosis

What characteristic inflorescence of the spurges, resembling a single flower, consists of a cup-shaped involucre of fused bracts enclosing several greatly reduced male flowers and a single female flower?
cyathium

What mother goddess was worshiped especially in Phrygia and later in Greece (where she was associated with Demeter), Rome, and the Roman provinces, with her consort Attis?
Cybele

What large group of islands in the southern Aegean Sea were regarded in antiquity as circling around the sacred island of Delos?
Cyclades

What does ``CRC'' abbreviate in computing?
cyclic redundancy check

What phylum established for a minute marine invertebrate (Symbion pandora) discovered in the 1990s attached to the mouthparts of lobsters is related to the phyla Bryozoa and Entoprocta?
Cycliophora

What curve (resembling a series of arches) is traced by a point on a circle being rolled along a straight line?
cycloid

What colourless toxic liquid derived from the distillation of coal tar is insoluble in water, soluble in alcohol, and used in the manufacture of insecticides and resins?
cyclopentadiene

Whom did Odysseus blind to escape death in The odyssey?
Cyclops Polyphemus

A cygnet is a young [---].
swan

Deneb is found in what prominent northern constellation?
Cygnus

What is a cornice moulding with an S-shaped cross-section called?
cyma

What flower cluster has a central stem bearing a single terminal flower that develops first, where the other flowers in the cluster develop as terminal buds of lateral stems?
cyme

What is the Welsh term for the Welsh language?
Cymraeg/Cymric

What is the Welsh name for Wales?
Cymru

(late eighth--ninth centuries) To what Anglo-Saxon poet are the following four poems attributed: Juliana, Elene, The Fates of the Apostles, and Christ II?
Cynewulf

(b. 1928) What American writer and critic wrote many works, such as Bloodshed and three novellas (1976) and The Puttermesser papers (1997), that examine being Jewish in contemporary life and has some of her essays collected in Fame and folly (1996)?
Cynthia Ozick

What is St. Cyprian's feast day?
16 September

To what family do minnows and carp belong?
Cyprinidae

What is a native of Cyprus called?
Cypriot

What are Cyprus's official languages?
Greek, Turkish

What is a dry single-seeded fruit formed from a double ovary of which only one develops into a seed, as in the daisy family, called?
cypsela

(1619--55) What French soldier, duelist, and writer is chiefly remembered for the large number of duels that he fought (many because of his proverbially large nose) as immortalized in a play by Edmond Rostand?
Savinien Cyrano de Bergerac

What region of northeastern Libya, bordering on the Mediterranean Sea, was settled by the Greeks circa 640 BC?
Cyrenaica

(826--869) What Greek missionary, after whom an alphabet was named, has his feast on 11 May in the Eastern Church and 14 February in the Western Church?
St. Cyril

(d. 444, feast day: 9 February) What doctor of the Church and patriarch of Alexandria is best known for his vehement opposition to the views of Nestorius, the patriarch of Constantinople?
St. Cyril of Alexandria

What hereditary disorder affecting the exocrine glands causes the production of abnormally thick mucus, leading to the blockage of the pancreatic ducts, intestines, and bronchi and often resulting in respiratory infection?
cystic fibrosis

What name is given to a larval tapeworm at a stage in which the scolex is inverted in a sac, typically found encysted in the muscle tissue of the host?
cysticercus

What name is given to the inflammation of the urinary bladder?
cystitis

What other name for Aphrodite comes from the name of an Ionian island?
Cytherea

To what planet does a Cytherean thing relate?
Venus

What name is given to any of a group of polycyclic compounds produced by fungi that are used experimentally in research for their property of interfering with cell processes?
cytochalasin

What term is given to any of a number of substances, such as interferon, interleukin, and growth factors, which are secreted by certain cells of the immune system and have an effect on other cells?
cytokine

What kind of herpes virus usually produces very mild symptoms in an infected person but may cause severe neurological damage in people with weakened immune systems and in the newborn?
cytomegalovirus

What is the chemical formula for cytosine?
C4H5N3O

Who founded the hedonistic school of philosophy?
Aristippus the Elder of Cyrene

What southern Polish city is known for the statue of the black Madonna in its church?
Częstochowa

When was D-Day?
6 June 1944

What name is given to the lowest layer of the ionosphere, which reflects low-frequency radio waves?
D layer

(1828--82) What English painter, poet, and founder of the Pre-Raphaelite brotherhood (1848) is best known for his idealized images of women, including Beata Beatrix (c. 1863) and The blessed Damozel (1871--79)?
Dante Gabriel Rossetti

(1885--1930) What English novelist, poet, and essayist's work is characterized by its condemnation of industrial society and its frank exploration of sexual relationships, having written Sons and lovers (1913), The rainbow (1915), and Lady Chatterley's lover (1928)?
D. H. Lawrence

(1844--1901) What English impresario and producer brought together the librettist Sir W. S. Gilbert and the composer Sir Arthur Sullivan, producing many of their operettas in London's Savoy Theatre, which he had established in 1881?
Richard D'Oyly Carte

In what year did Vasco da Gama lead the first expedition around the Cape of Good Hope?
1497

What port and city in central Vietnam on the South China Sea served as an American military base during the Vietnam War and was called ``Tourane''?
Da Nang

What was Da Nang's former name?
Tourane

What word refers to human existence in existentialism?
Dasein

What artistic technique used by Leonardo da Vinci involves allowing tones and colours to shade gradually into one another, producing softened outlines or hazy forms?
sfumato

What is the Arabic acronym for ISIL?
Daesh

On what river is Dachau located?
Amper River

In southeastern Europe in what is now northwestern Romania, what ancient country was annexed by Trajan in 106 AD as a province of the Roman Empire?
Dacia

What name is given to a member of a band of armed robbers in India or Myanmar?
dacoit

What dessert, whose name derives from a town in France, is made from layers of meringue containing ground nuts, with fillings such as cream, buttercream, or ganache between?
dacquoise

What metrical foot consists of one stressed syllable followed by two unstressed syllables or, in Greek and Latin, one long syllable followed by two short syllables?
dactyl

What is a volcanic rock resembling andesite but containing free quartz called?
dacite

What early--twentieth-century international movement in art, literature, music, and film repudiated and mocked artistic and social conventions and emphasized the illogical and absurd?
Dada

Where was Dada launched?
Zürich

When was Dada launched?
1916

What name is given to the lower part of the wall of a room, below about waist height, if it is a different colour or has a different covering than the upper part?
dado

What Indian Union Territory on the Arabian Sea has its capital in Silvassa?
Dadra and Nagar Haveli

What craftsman and considered inventor of carpentry is said to have built the labyrinth for Minos, king of Crete, who imprisoned him and his son Icarus, both of whom escaped using wings which he made and fastened with wax?
Daedalus

(1905--61) What Swedish diplomat and politician was influential as secretary general in the establishment of the United Nations emergency force in Sinai and Gaza 1956, initiated peace moves in the Middle East 1957--58, was killed in a plane crash while on a peace mission in Congo, and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize (1961, posthumously)?
Dag Hammarskjöld

What autonomous republic in southwestern Russia, on the western shore of the Caspian Sea, has its capital in Makhachkala?
Dagestan

What national deity of the ancient Philistines was represented as a fish-tailed man?
Dagon

(1789--1851) What French physicist invented the first practical photographic process, which now bears his name?
Louis Daguerre

What passenger boat, whose name comes from the Arabic for ``golden,'' is used on the Nile and typically has lateen sails?
dahabeah

Who wrote Charlie and the chocolate factory (1964)?
Roald Dahl

What was Benin's name until 1975?
Dahomey

What name is given to a traditional street food stall with a small seating area in Hong Kong?
dai pai dong

What is a person outside China who buys consumer goods on behalf of people living in China called?
daigou

What radish has a large slender white root that is typically eaten cooked, especially in Eastern cuisine, and used for fodder?
daikon

What name is given to a single bet on the winners of two named horse races in a day?
daily double

What name was given to one of the great lords who were vassals of the shogun in feudal Japan?
daimyo

(1834--1900) What German engineer and engine manufacturer produced a small internal combustion engine using gasoline as a fuel and made it propel a bicycle in 1884 and, in 1890, formed a company to produce these engines?
Gottlieb Daimler

What cocktail's main ingredients are rum and lime juice?
daiquiri

What was Dalian's former name?
Dairen

What word refers to a low platform for a lectern, seats of honour, or a throne?
dais

What river is also known as the ``Dakota River''?
James River

What does ``Dalai Lama'' mean in English?
ocean monk

What monetary unit of the Gambia is equal to one hundred butut?
dalasi

(1875--1968) What English physiologist and pharmacologist investigated the role of histamine in anaphylactic shock and allergy and the role of acetylcholine as a natural neurotransmitter, winning the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1936) with Otto Loewi?
Sir Henry Hallett Dale

(1904--89) What Spanish surrealist is noted for works like The persistence of memory (1931) and Christ of St. John of the cross (1951)?
Salvador Dalí

What is a member of the lowest caste called in the traditional Indian caste system?
Dalit/untouchable

What is the common name for Ovis dalli?
Dall sheep

Where was John F. Kennedy assassinated?
Dallas

In what modern-day country was Dalmatia located?
Croatia

Of what Roman province was Dalmatia once part?
Illyricum

What wide-sleeved, long, loose vestment open at the sides is worn by deacons, bishops, and some monarchs at their coronation?
dalmatic

What unit, used in expressing the molecular weight of proteins, is equivalent to the atomic mass unit?
dalton

What name for protanopia comes from the name of an English chemist?
daltonism

What law states that the pressure exerted by a mixture of gases in a fixed volume is equal to the sum of the pressures that would be exerted by each gas alone in the same volume?
Dalton's law

What union territory in India, north of Mumbai, has its capital in Daman?
Daman and Diu

What adjective, named after a millennia-old city, is used in reference to an important moment of insight, typically one that leads to a dramatic transformation of attitude or belief?
Damascene

What kind of steel, named after an ancient Levantine city, was made with a wavy surface pattern produced by hammer-welding strips of steel and iron followed by repeated heating and forging and was used chiefly for knife and sword blades?
Damascus steel

What sweet-scented rose of an old variety (or hybrid) that is typically pink or light red in colour has soft, velvety petals and is used to make attar?
damask rose

What name is given to the eastern branch of the Nile delta?
Damietta

What growth retardant sprayed on vegetables and fruit, especially apples, to enhance the quality of the crop has the chemical formula C6H12N2O3?
daminozide

What resin obtained from any of a number of tropical and mainly Indo-Malaysian trees (families Araucariaceae, Dipterocarpaceae, and Burseraceae) is used to make varnish?
dammar

What rare English jural verb means ``cause injury to''?
damnify

What phrase, derived from the name of a legendary courtier who was seated at a banquet with a sword hanging by a single hair over his head, is used to refer to an extremely precarious and threatening situation?
Damoclean sword

What legendary Syracusan of the fourth century BC, whose friend Pythias was sentenced to death by Dionysius I, stood bail for Pythias, who returned just in time to save him and was himself reprieved?
Damon

What son of Jacob and Bilhah was the progenitor of a tribe of Israel whose settlement marked the northern limit of the ancient Hebrew kingdom of Israel?
Dan

What name is given to any of the ten degrees of advanced proficiency in judo or karate?
dan

What name is given to a small marker buoy with a lightweight flagpole?
dan

An oracle betokened that this daughter of Acrisuius would bear a son who would kill her father. Attempting to evade this, Acrisius imprisoned her, but Zeus visited her in the form of a shower of gold and she conceived Perseus, who killed Acrisius by accident. Name this figure of Greek myth.
Danae

What daughters of Danaus were compelled to marry the sons of his brother Aegyptus but murdered their husbands on the wedding night, except for one, Hypermnestra, who helped her husband to escape?
Danaids

What name is given to a member of a Sufi religious order who has taken vows of poverty and austerity?
dervish

What port in Liaoning province near the mouth of the Yalu River is located on the border with North Korea and was once called ``Antung''?
Dandong

What land tax was levied in medieval England to raise funds for protection against Danish invaders?
Danegeld

What name is given to a yellow van that transports passengers for a fare as part of an informal transit system in Lagos, Nigeria?
danfo

What name is given to a participle intended to modify a noun which is not actually present in the text?
dangling participle

What apocryphal book portrays Daniel as a wise judge?
Susanna

(1850--1931) What American sculptor created the statue of the Minute man, unveiled 1875 at Concord, Massachusetts, and the seated figure of Abraham Lincoln, completed 1922, in the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, DC?
Daniel Chester French

Who penned Robinson Crusoe (1719)?
Daniel Defoe

Who penned Moll Flanders (1722) and A journal of the plague year (1722)?
Daniel Defoe

What Irish nationalist leader and social reformer, known as ``the liberator,'' caused the British government to grant emancipation to Catholics to enable him to take his seat in the House of Commons?
Daniel O'Connell

(b. 1945) What Nicaraguan president (1985--90, 2007--) became the leader of the Sandinista National Liberation Front in 1966 and president after the Sandinista election victory in 1984?
Daniel Ortega

What is the name of the Danish national flag?
Dannebrog

Who was Dante's muse --- a woman about whom he wrote in Vita nuova (c. 1290--94)?
Beatrice Portinari

(1828--82) What English painter, poet, and founder of the Pre-Raphaelite brotherhood (1848) is best known for his idealized images of women, including Beata Beatrix (c. 1863) and The blessed Damozel (1871--79)?
Dante Gabriel Rossetti

(1759--94) What French revolutionary and initial ally of Robespierre later revolted against the severity of the Revolutionary Tribunal and was executed on Robespierre's orders?
Georges Danton

What group of landscape painters working in the early sixteenth century included Altdorfer and Cranach the Elder?
Danube School

What is the German name for Gdańsk?
Danzig

What nymph was turned into a laurel bush to save her from the amorous pursuit of Apollo?
Daphne

What Sicilian shepherd, according to one version of the legend, was struck with blindness for his infidelity to the nymph Echenaïs and subsequently consoled himself with pastoral poetry, of which he was the inventor?
Daphnis

For what is ``Dapsang'' an alternative name?
K2

What sulphur compound with bacteriostatic action is used to treat leprosy and has the chemical formula (H2NC6H4)2SO2?
dapsone

In what province is Daqing located?
Heilongjiang

What city's name translates to ``haven of peace''?
Dar es Salaam

What region in western Sudan, an independent kingdom until 1874, was the site of a rebellion against the Sudanese government that began in 2003?
Darfur

What form of Persian is spoken in Afghanistan?
Dari

What sparsely populated province of eastern Panama shares its name with the part of the Caribbean Sea between Panama and Colombia, and was a name once applied to all of the Isthmus of Panama?
Darien

(1926--2016) What Italian playwright and Nobel laureate (1997) wrote Accidental death of an anarchist (political satire, 1970) and Open couple (farce, 1983) and won the Nobel Prize for Literature (1997)?
Dario Fo

(c. 550--486 BC) What king of Persia (521--486 BC) invaded Greece but was defeated at Marathon (490 BC) after a revolt by the Greek cities in Ionia (499--494 BC)?
Darius I

(1892--1974) What French composer and member of Les Six composed the music to Cocteau's ballet Le Boeuf sur le toit (1919) and composed polytonal works influenced by jazz?
Darius Milhaud

What hill station in West Bengal near the Sikkim border is noted for its tea industry, its views of Kangchenjunga, and a Himalayan Railway that bears its name?
Darjeeling

In what period in western Europe between the fall of the Roman Empire and the high Middle Ages (c. 500--1100) did Germanic tribes sweep through Europe and North Africa, often attacking and destroying towns and settlements?
Dark Ages

What state bears the nickname ``Dark and Bloody Ground''?
Kentucky

What third-longest river in Australia flows southwest for 2,757 km before joining the Murray River?
Darling River

What Hindu noun refers to an opportunity or occasion of seeing a holy person or the image of a deity?
darshan

What name is given to human existence in existentialism?
Dasein

What stock made from fish and kelp is used in Japanese cooking?
dashi

(1894--1961) What American novelist developed the hard-boiled style of detective fiction in works such as The Maltese falcon (1930) and The thin man (1932), both of which were made into successful movies, and lived for many years with playwright Lillian Hellman, with whom he was persecuted for left-wing views?
Dashiell Hammett

What is the alternative name for the quoll: a catlike carnivorous marsupial with short legs and a white-spotted coat?
dasyure

What case of nouns and pronouns indicates an indirect object or recipient?
dative

If you remove one letter from the name of a European river, you get the name of a French stew of meat, typically beef, braised slowly in wine. What is its name?
daube

(1808--78) What French painter and cartoonist produced lithographs satirizing French society and politics?
Honoré Daumier

What historical noun referred to the eldest son of the King of France?
dauphin

On what island is Davao located?
Mindanao

Based on Victor Hugo's believed-to-be birthday, what was Jean Valjean's first prison code in Les Misérables?
24601

What is the velocity addition formula of relativity?
$$ v_{AC} = \frac{v_{AB} + v_{BC}}{1 + (v_{AB}v_{BC})/c^2} $$

How do you measure rapidity?
measure the hyperbolic angle that differentiates two frames of reference in relative motion

What are the first five perfect numbers?
6, 28, 496, 8128, 33550336

This French mathematician, who was educated at École Normale Supérieure, constructed the cannonball problem, proved that $2^{127} - 1$ was prime by hand, studied in great depth the Fibonacci sequence, and wrote Théorie des nombres. Name this inventor of the Tower of Hanoi puzzle.
Édouard Lucas

What Dutch musical director and orchestra conductor was the principal conductor of the London Philharmonic Orchestra and musical director of Glyndebourne and Covent Garden?
Bernard Haitink

What English painter is best known for his California work of the mid-1960s, which depicts flat, almost shadowless architecture, lawns, and swimming pools?
David Hockney

(1711--76) What Scottish philosopher, economist, and historian rejected the possibility of certainty in knowledge and wrote A treatise of human nature (1739--40) and History of England (1754--62)?
David Hume

(1908--91) What English movie director's many movies include The bridge on the River Kwai (1957), Lawrence of Arabia (1962), Doctor Zhivago (1965), and A Passage to India (1984)?
Sir David Lean

(b. 1935) What English novelist and academic has been the professor of Modern English Literature at the University of Birmingham since 1976, often satirizing academia and literary criticism in his novels which include Changing places (1975), Small world (1984), and Therapy (1995)?
David Lodge

(1785--1841) What Scottish painter established his reputation with the painting Village politicians (1806) and contributed to the growing prestige of genre painting?
Sir David Wilkie

(1748--1825) What French painter is noted for neoclassical paintings such as The oath of the Horatii (1784) and The intervention of the Sabine women (1799)?
Jacques-Louis David

(feast day: 1 March) What Welsh monk has been regarded as the patron saint of Wales since the twelfth century?
St. David

What mountain range includes Mt. Locke?
Davis Mountains

What sea passage separates Greenland from Baffin Island and connects Baffin Bay with the Atlantic Ocean?
Davis Strait

What jazz trumpeter, composer, and bandleader introduced modal jazz with Kind of blue (1959)?
Miles Davis

(1881--1958) What American physicist discovered electron diffraction with L. H. Germer, confirming de Broglie's theory of the wave nature of electrons, and shared the 1937 Nobel Prize for Physics with G. P. Thomson?
Clinton Joseph Davisson

What name is given to a small crane onboard a ship, usually used to suspend or lower a lifeboat?
davit

(1778--1829) What English pioneer of electrochemistry discovered nitrous oxide (laughing gas) and the elements sodium, potassium, magnesium, calcium, strontium, and barium, identified and named the element chlorine, determined the properties of iodine, and demonstrated that diamond was a form of carbon?
Sir Humphry Davy

(b. 1937) What Australian swimmer won Olympic gold for the 100-metre freestyle in 1956, 1960, and 1964, the first competitor to win the same title at three successive Olympics?
Dawn Fraser

What name is given to the German stock exchange index?
DAX (Deutscher Aktien IndeX)

(1915--81) What Israeli statesman and general oversaw Israel's victory in the Six Day War as minister of defence and played a prominent role in negotiations leading to the Camp David Accords as foreign minister?
Moshe Dayan

What two days are known collectively as ``the High Holidays'' or ``the Days of Awe''?
Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur

Identify the work: ``They are not long, the days of wine and roses.''
``Vitae Summa Brevis'' (1896)

What name is given to a wall poster written in large characters in China?
da zi bao

What is the symbol for dubnium?
Db

What does ``DCM'' abbreviate in the United Kingdom?
Distinguished Conduct Medal

What river in Angola rises near the city of Huambo and flows south and then west for 250 km to the Atlantic Ocean?
Cunene

A synthetic analog of a pyrimidine nucleoside, what drug inhibits the replication of HIV and is used in the treatment of AIDS, especially in combination with zidovudine?
dideoxycytidine (DDC)

A synthetic analog of a purine nucleoside, what drug inhibits the replication of HIV and is used in the treatment of AIDS, especially in combination with zidovudine?
dideoxyinosine (DDI)

What does ``DDOS'' stand for?
distributed denial of service

What does ``BIOS'' stand for?
basic input-output system

Now banned in many countries, what synthetic organic compound and insecticide tends to persist in the environment and become concentrated in animals at the head of the food chain?
DDT

What does ``DDT'' abbreviate?
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane

What is the chemical formula of DDT?
CCl3CH(C6H4Cl)2

What soft coral (Alcyonium digitatum) has spongy lobes stiffened by calcareous spines?
dead man's fingers

What salt lake or inland sea in the Jordan valley on the Israel-Jordan border is 1,300 feet (400 m) below sea level?
Dead Sea

(1931--2015) What American college basketball coach coached the University of North Carolina from 1961 until 1997, establishing a career record of 879 wins and 254 losses and also coached the 1976 American Olympic team to a gold medal?
Dean Smith

What psychoanalytic term refers to an innate desire for self-annihilation, thought to manifest in the psyche's conservative and regressive tendency to reduce tension?
death instinct

What noun refers to the tolling of a bell to mark someone's passing?
death knell

What is the lowest point in the US?
Badwater

What is the interruption or destruction of the inward connections of nerve cells called, performed primarily in animal experiments to demonstrate the spontaneity of locomotor movement?
deafferentation

To what biblical prophet and leader, who inspired the Israelite army to defeat the Canaanites, is a song of victory, one of the oldest sections of the Bible, attributed?
Deborah

What d-word refers to the mouth of a river or valley?
debouchure

What is debridement?
the removal of damaged tissue or foreign objects from a wound

What unit used to express electric dipole moments of molecules is equivalent to $3.336 \times 10^{-30}$ coulomb metres?
debye

(1884--1966) What Dutch-born American chemical physicist (Nobel Prize for Chemistry, 1936) is best known for establishing the existence of permanent electric dipole moments in many molecules, demonstrating the use of these to determine molecular size and shape, and modifying Einstein's theory of specific heats as applied to solids?
Peter Debye

What Greek-derived term refers to the Ten Commandments?
Decalogue

What work by Boccaccio, written between 1348 and 1358, contains a hundred tales supposedly told in ten days by a party of ten young people who had fled from the Black Death in Florence and was influential on later writers such as Chaucer and Shakespeare?
Decameron

What colourless liquid hydrocarbon of the alkane series is present in petroleum products such as kerosene?
decane

What verb refers to the gradual pouring of wine from one container into another to not disturb the sediment?
decant

What order of crustaceans includes shrimps, crabs, and lobsters?
Decapoda

What events comprise the decathlon?
100-metre dash, long jump, shot put, high jump, 400-metre dash, 110-metre hurdles, discus, pole vault, javelin, 1,500-metre run

What triangular plateau in southern India is bounded by the Malabar Coast in the west, the Coromandel Coast in the east, and the Vindhya mountains in the north?
Deccan

What group led an unsuccessful revolt against Tsar Nicholas I in 1825?
Decembrists

What thick layer of modified mucous membrane lines the uterus during pregnancy and is shed with the afterbirth?
decidua

What name is given to the problem of finding a way to decide whether a formula or class of formulas is true or provable within a given system of axioms?
decision problem

What is the German for ``decision problem''?
Entscheidungsproblem

What Roman emperor (249--51) was the first Roman emperor to promote systematic persecution of the Christians?
Decius

What papermaking machine device is used to limit the size of the sheet and consists of a continuous belt on either side of the wire?
deckle

What type of long-term memory involves conscious recollection of particular facts and events?
declarative memory

What name is given to the bridge player whose bid establishes the suit of the contract and who must therefore play both their own hand and the exposed hand of the dummy?
declarer

What axis of an equatorially mounted telescope is orthogonal to the polar axis?
declination axis

What is a declivity?
downward slope

What liquor results from concentrating the essence of a substance by heating or boiling, especially a medicinal preparation made from a plant?
decoction

What condition, suffered particularly by divers (who often call it ``the bends'') and called ``caisson disease,'' results when sudden decompression causes nitrogen bubbles to form in the body's tissues and can cause pain in the muscles and joints, cramps, numbness, nausea, and paralysis?
decompression sickness

What stage of English Gothic church architecture typical of the fourteenth century (between Early English and Perpendicular) included increasing use of decoration and geometric, curvilinear, and reticulated tracery?
Decorated

What does it mean to decorticate something?
remove the bark, rind, or husk from it

What is the art or craft of decorating objects with paper cut-outs?
decoupage

What Latin noun refers to a collection of decisions and judgments in canon law?
Decretum

What posture is adopted by someone lying down?
decubitus

What is the technical term for ``bedsore''?
decubitus ulcer

What adjective describes a plant lying along the ground or a surface, with the extremity curving upward?
decumbent

If things are decussating, what are they doing?
crossing to form an X

What name is given to the open gallery for spectators at the service side of a tennis court?
dedans

What is the radial distance from the pitch circle of a cogwheel or worm wheel to the bottom of the tooth space or groove?
dedendum

What is laisser-aller?
carelessness, slovenliness

Define ``intransigent.''
unwilling or refusing to change one's views or to agree about something

What ancient Greek school of philosophy was founded in Athens by Zeno of Citium?
Stoicism

What village in southeastern Jamaica founded in 1494 by the Spanish was the centre of shipping and commerce in the seventeenth century?
Port Royal

Define ``salutary.''
(especially concerning something unwelcome or unpleasant) producing good effects; beneficial

What type of ancient Greek pottery vessel used to pour small quantities of liquids such as oil has a flat shape and a spout at one or both ends that could also be used as a handle?
askos

What Columbia University mathematician gave a lower bound for the class number of an imaginary quadratic field assuming the existence of an elliptic curve whose $L$-function had a zero of order at least three at $s = 1/2$ that Gross and Zagier later discovered?
Dorian Goldfeld

This mathematician found a counterexample to Euler's sum of powers conjecture for fourth powers, proved that an elliptic curve over the rational numbers is supersingular at infinitely many primes, discovered an elliptic curve with lower bound rank 28 and another with exact rank 20, and extended Schoof's algorithm. Who is this chess master, chess composer, and musical genius who was advised by Benedict Gross and Barry Mazur and made a tenured professor at Harvard at 26?
Noam Elkies

Define ``concomitant'' as an adjective.
naturally accompanying or associated

Define ``concomitant'' as a noun.
phenomenon that naturally accompanies or follows something

What northeast Scottish river rises in the Grampian Mountains and flows east past Balmoral Castle to the North Sea at Aberdeen?
Dee

What name is given to a body of people, typically influential members of government agencies or the military, believed to be involved in the secret manipulation or control of government policy and derived from a Turkish term?
deep state (derin devlet)

What brand of diethyltoluamide, a colourless oily liquid with a mild odour, is used as an insect repellent?
Deet

What does it mean to defalcate?
embezzle

What is the action or process of rendering something null and void in law?
defeasance

What title conferred on Henry VIII by Pope Leo X in 1521 was recognized by Parliament as an official title of the English monarch in 1544 and has been borne by all subsequent sovereigns?
Fidei Defensor

What does ``Fidei Defensor'' mean?
Defender of the Faith

What is the abatement of a fever as indicated by a decrease in bodily temperature called?
defervescence

What is the protection of a position, vehicle, or troops against enemy observation or gunfire called?
defilade

What name is given to combustion propagating through a gas or across the surface of an explosive at subsonic speeds, driven by heat transfer?
deflagration

What chemical, used in warfare, removes the leaves from trees and plants?
defoliant

What is the derivative of the Riemann zeta function at $0$?
$$ -\frac{1}{2}\pi\log 2 $$

What is $\zeta(2)$?
\begin{align*}\frac{\pi^2}{6}\end{align*}

What is $\zeta(4)$?
\begin{align*}\frac{\pi^4}{90}\end{align*}

What is $\zeta(6)$?
\begin{align*}\frac{\pi^6}{945}\end{align*}

What is $\zeta(12)$?
\begin{align*}\frac{691\pi^{12}}{638512875}\end{align*}

By what name is $\zeta(3)$ known?
Apéry's constant

What is pointing the foot to an open position with an arched instep slightly off the floor called in ballet?
dégagé

(1834--1917) What French impressionist painter and sculptor is known for his paintings of ballet dancers, such as Dancer lacing her shoe?
Edgar Degas

What verb is used to say ``remove unwanted magnetism from to correct colour disturbance''?
degauss

What is the technical term for swallowing?
deglutition

What rat-like rodent with a long silky coat (family Octodontidae) is found in southern South America?
degu

What does it mean to degust?
taste carefully, to appreciate it fully

What is the technical term for a pod or seed vessel to gape or burst open?
dehisce

What naturally occurring weak androgenic steroid hormone produced by the adrenal glands with the chemical formula C19H28O2 prevents ageing, improves sexual function, enhances athletic performance, and can treat osteoporosis?
DHEA (dehydroepiandrosterone)

What enzyme catalyzes the removal of hydrogen atoms from a particular molecule, particularly in the electron transport chain reactions of cell respiration in conjunction with the coenzymes NAD and FAD?
dehydrogenase

What does ``Dei gratia'' mean?
by the grace of God

What wife of Hercules was tricked into smearing poison on a garment that caused his death?
Deianira

What outer, smaller, football-shaped Martian satellite was discovered in 1877?
Deimos

It was prophesied that this tragic heroine's beauty would bring banishment and death to heroes. King Conchobar of Ulster wanted to marry her, but she fell in love with Naoise, son of Usnach, who with his brothers carried her off to Scotland. They were lured back by Conchobar and treacherously slain, and she took her own life. Who is this figure of Irish myth?
Deirdre

(1798--1863) What chief painter of the French romantic school is known for his use of vivid colour, free drawing, and sometimes violent subject matter?
Eugène Delacroix

(1885--1941) What French painter painted some of the first purely abstract pictures and was one of the founding members of Orphism, together with his wife, Sonia?
Robert Delaunay

What is the process of reducing the level of one's debt by rapidly selling one's assets?
deleverage

What home of painters Pieter de Hooch and Jan Vermeer is also noted for its pottery?
Delft

Who made Delhi the capital of the Mughal empire in 1638?
Shah Jahan

This alliance of ancient Greek city-states, dominated by Athens, joined in 478--447 BC against the Persians. It was disbanded on the defeat of Athens in the Peloponnesian War (404 BC) but again united under Athens's leadership against Spartan aggression in 377--38 BC. Identify this league that is also called the Athenian empire.
Delian League

What woman betrayed Samson to the Philistines (Judges 16) by revealing to them that the secret of his strength lay in his long hair?
Delilah

What psychotic condition is typical of withdrawal in chronic alcoholics, involving tremors, hallucinations, anxiety, and disorientation?
delirium tremens

What literary noun of Germanic origin refers to a small valley, usually among trees?
dell

(c. 1374--1438) What Italian sculptor is noted for the biblical reliefs on the portal of San Petronio in Bologna (1425--35)?
Jacopo della Quercia

(1400--82) What Italian sculptor and ceramicist is best known for his relief panels in Florence Cathedral and his colour-glazed terra cotta figures?
Luca della Robbia

What 290 km-long peninsular region in the eastern United States includes Delaware, the eastern shore of Maryland, and a small strip of Virginia, separating Chesapeake Bay from the Atlantic Ocean?
Delmarva

What name refers to a small steak cut from the front section of the short loin of beef?
Delmonico steak (club steak)

(b. 1925) What French socialist politician, president of the European Commission (1985--94), pressed for a closer European Union and oversaw the introduction of a single market within the European Community, which came into effect on 1 January 1993?
Jacques Delors

What small Greek island in the Aegean Sea, regarded as the centre of the Cyclades, was considered sacred to Apollo in classical times and, according to legend, was the birthplace of Apollo and Artemis?
Delos

What most significant religious sanctuary of the ancient Greek world, situated on the lower southern slopes of Mount Parnassus above the Gulf of Corinth, was dedicated to Apollo, was thought of as the navel of the earth, and housed the Pythia?
Delphi

What small constellation (the Dolphin) is just north of the celestial equator near Cygnus?
Delphinus

What name is given to a triangular arrangement of electrical three-phase windings in series, each of the three wires of the circuit being connected to a junction of two windings?
delta connection

What name is given to the brain's electrical activity at a frequency of around 1--8 Hz, typical of sleep?
delta rhythm

What is a postcard collector called?
deltiologist

What partially refined light brown cane sugar originally came from Guyana?
demerara

What adjective is used to describe fish living close to the floor of the sea or lake?
demersal

What goddess of cereal grains was the daughter of Cronus and Rhea, the mother of Persephone, and associated with Cybele?
Demeter

In whose honour were the Eleusinian mysteries held?
Demeter

What class of women in nineteenth-century France were considered to be of doubtful morality and social standing?
demimonde

Who was Democritus's teacher?
Leucippus

What form of mange is caused by follicle mites and tends to affect the head and foreparts?
demodectic mange

(384--322 BC) What Athenian orator and statesman is known for his political speeches on the need to resist the aggressive tendencies of Philip II of Macedon (the Philippics)?
Demosthenes

What is a substance that relieves irritation of the mucous membranes in the mouth by forming a protective film called?
demulcent

What is a charge payable to the owner of a chartered ship in respect of failure to load or discharge the ship within the time agreed called?
demurrage

What paper size is now standardized at 564 by 444 mm?
demy

What is the basic monetary unit of North Macedonia?
denar

What ancient Roman silver coin was originally worth ten asses?
denarius

What verb refers to the destruction of the characteristic properties of a biological macromolecule by heat, acidity, or other effects that disrupt its molecular conformation?
denature

What name is given to a synthetic polymer with a structure of repeatedly branching chains, typically forming spherical macromolecules?
dendrimer

What is the science or technique of dating events, environmental change, and archaeological artifacts by using the characteristic patterns of annual growth rings in timber and tree trunks?
dendrochronology

What is the brightest star in the constellation Cygnus, a yellow supergiant?
Deneb

What is the second brightest star in the constellation Leo?
Denebola

(b. 1943) What French actress is noted for Repulsion (1965), Belle de jour (1967), and Indochine (1992)?
Catherine Deneuve

(1904--97) What Chinese communist statesman, vice premier (1973--76, 1977--80), and vice chairman of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party (1977--80) was discredited during the Cultural Revolution but reinstated in 1977 and became the leader of China?
Deng Xiaoping

(d. c. 250, feast day: 9 October) What Italian-born French bishop and patron saint of France was one of a group of seven missionaries sent from Rome to convert Gaul (according to tradition), became bishop of Paris, and was martyred in the reign of the emperor Valerian?
St. Denis

(1713--84) What French philosopher, writer, and critic was a leading figure of the Enlightenment in France and a principal editor of the Encyclopédie (1751--76), having written Le rêve de d'Alembert (1782) and Le neveu de Rameau (1805)?
Denis Diderot

What extinct species of human of robust build was distributed from Siberia to Southeast Asia in the Upper Paleolithic?
Denisovan

(1900--79) What Hungarian-born British electrical engineer conceived the idea of holography and won the Nobel Prize for Physics (1971)?
Gábor Dénes (Dennis Gabor)

What is the chief city of Bali?
Denpasar

What does ``Deo gratias'' mean?
thanks be to God

What does ``Deo volente'' mean?
God willing

What sugar has the chemical formula C5H10O4?
deoxyribose

What are convenience stores called in Quebec?
dépanneurs

What is the innate corruption of human nature due to original sin called?
depravity

What adjective, coming from the Latin for ``about the thing,'' means ``relating to the properties of things mentioned in an assertion or expression, rather than to the assertion or expression itself''?
de re

What bicycle mechanism moves the chain out and up, allowing it to shift to different cogs?
derailleur

(1880--1954) What French painter and exponent of Fauvism designed theatre sets and costumes, notably for the Ballets Russes?
André Derain

What order of insects comprises the earwigs?
Dermaptera

What name is given to the lateral wall of each somite in a vertebrate embryo, giving rise to the connective tissue of the skin?
dermatome

What name is given to the inflammation of the skin and underlying muscle tissue, involving degeneration of collagen, discoloration, and swelling, typically occurring as an autoimmune condition or associated with internal cancer?
dermatomyositis

What family of small beetles includes many kinds that are destructive (especially as larvae) to hides, skin, fur, wool, and other animal substances?
Dermestidae

What small order of mammals comprises the flying lemurs or colugos?
Dermoptera

What motorized bicycle is used to set the pace in racing events such as a keirin?
derny

What kind of crane named after the surname of a London hangman has a movable pivoted arm for moving or lifting heavy weights, especially on a ship?
derrick

(1930--2004) What Algerian-born French philosopher and literary critic was a leading figure in the theories of deconstructionism and postmodernism?
Jacques Derrida

What does DES abbreviate in biochemistry?
diethylstilbestrol

What does DES abbreviate in computing?
data encryption standard

What literary verb that means ``talk tediously or at length'' can also be a noun referring to an independent treble melody usually sung or played above a basic melody?
descant

In what year was René Descartes born?
1596

In what year did René Descartes die?
1650

Around what piece of metal is a rope passed to slow descent during rappelling?
descendeur

Define ``descry.''
catch sight of

What name was proposed in the 1840s by Mormon settlers for Utah?
Deseret

(1891--1944) What German field marshal known as the Desert Fox captured Tobruk in 1942 as commander of the Afrika Korps but was defeated by Montgomery at El Alamein later that year, committing suicide after being implicated in the officers' conspiracy against Hitler?
Erwin Rommel

What name is given to a hygroscopic substance that is used as a drying agent?
desiccant

(c. 1469--1536) What Dutch humanist and scholar was the foremost Renaissance scholar of northern Europe and paved the way for the Reformation with his satires on the Catholic Church?
Desiderius Erasmus

What potato variety that was originally bred in the Netherlands has red skin with yellow waxy flesh?
Desiree

The presence of what single-celled freshwater alga that appears to be composed of two rigid cells with a shared nucleus is usually an indicator of unpolluted water?
desmid

(b. 1928) What British zoologist and writer wrote The naked ape (1967) and Animal-watching (1990) after studying animal behaviour and the implications for the human condition?
John Desmond Morris

By what structure are two adjacent cells attached, formed from protein plaques in the cell membranes linked by filaments?
desmosome

What river in western Russia and Ukraine rises east of Smolensk and flows for 885 km to enter the Dnieper River near Kyiv?
Desna River

What French-derived word refers to a ruler or other person who holds absolute power, typically one who exercises it cruelly or oppressively?
despot

What does ``desquamate'' mean?
come off in scales or flakes

What name was given to a medieval knight's warhorse?
destrier

What kind of matrix consists of ``blocks,'' where each block has a particular eigenvalue on its diagonal and ones on its superdiagonal?
Jordan (normal form)

What is the approximate angle between the hydrogen atoms in water?
104.5 degrees

Approximately how far is the centre of hydrogen to oxygen in water?
0.957 angstroms

What name is given to the evolutionary reversion to a primitive linear body plan in gastropod mollusks?
detorsion

From the Latin for ``wear away,'' what rare noun refers to wearing something away by friction?
detrition

What smooth muscle component of the urinary bladder facilitates contraction of the bladder wall during micturition?
detrusor

What son of Prometheus survived a flood sent by Zeus to punish human wickedness with his wife Pyrrha, who was then instructed to throw stones over his shoulders to repopulate the world?
Deucalion

What Greek-derived Latin phrase refers to an unexpected power or event saving a seemingly hopeless situation, especially as a contrived plot device in a play or novel?
deus ex machina

What is the person second in importance to the protagonist in a drama called?
deuteragonist

What is colour-blindness resulting from insensitivity to green light, causing confusion of greens, reds, and yellows?
deuteranopia

What name is given to the supposed later author of Isaiah 40--55?
Deutero-Isaiah

What monetary unit of Germany was equal to one-hundredth of a mark?
pfennig

What name was given to a member of a class of divine beings in the Vedic period? They are benevolent in Indian religions and evil in Zoroastrianism.
deva

In what ballet movement is one leg is raised to the knee of the supporting leg, then unfolded and kept in a fully extended position?
développé

What supreme goddess of Hinduism is often identified with Parvati and Shakti?
Devi

What rocky island off the coast of French Guiana was used from 1852 to 1953 as a penal settlement, especially for political prisoners?
Devil's Island

What rock column 264 m high in northeastern Wyoming is a national monument on the Belle Fourche River?
Devil's Tower

What is the county town of Devon?
Exeter

What velvet fabric has a pattern formed by burning the pile away with acid?
devoré

What does DEW abbreviate?
distant early warning

What name is given to a central finance department, chief administrative office, or regional governing body in Islamic societies?
diwan

What double-walled flask of metal or silvered glass with a vacuum between the walls is used to hold liquids at well below ambient temperature?
dewar

(1837--1917) What American naval officer was appointed commodore of the navy in 1896 and heralded as the hero of the battle of Manila Bay in 1898 during the Spanish-American War?
George Dewey

What is the Welsh name for St. David?
Dewi

What name is given to the fold of loose skin hanging from the neck or throat of an animal, especially that present in many cattle?
dewlap

What drug (C22H29FO5) that is a more potent synthetic analog of cortisol is used chiefly as an anti-inflammatory agent?
dexamethasone

What adjective denotes something of or on the right side or right hand?
dextral

What adjective denotes something of or on the left side or left hand?
sinistral

What carbohydrate gum is formed by the fermentation of sugars, consisting of polymers of glucose?
dextran

What soluble gummy substance obtained by hydrolysis of starch is used as a thickening agent and in adhesives and dietary supplements?
dextrin

What oil town in eastern Saudi Arabia was an Allied forces port and military base during the Persian Gulf War?
Dhahran

What fertile province in southern Oman was the site of a rebellion in the 60s and 70s?
Dhofar

What word from the Greek for ``made of general ingredients'' refers to a solution or remedy for all difficulties or diseases?
diacatholicon

What name is given to a celebration held on 5 November?
bonfire night

What constant, commonly denoted alpha, is approximately $1/137$ and quantifies the strength of the electromagnetic interaction between elementary charged particles?
fine structure constant

What German biologist, chemist, and physician is responsible for the principle of conservation of energy?
Julius von Mayer

What were enzymes initially called?
ferments

How many amino acids are there?
twenty

What functional group contains a carbon-nitrogen double bond and is sometimes called a Schiff base?
imine

What adjective refers to stamens united by their filaments to form two groups?
diadelphous

What is a diadem?
jewelled crown or headband

What mark is placed over a vowel to indicate that it is sounded in a separate syllable, like in naïve?
dieresis

What is the fifth and last stage of the prophase of meiosis, following diplotene, when the separation of homologous chromosomes is complete and crossing over has occurred?
diakinesis

What Marxist theory postulates that political and historical events result from the conflict of social forces and are interpretable as a series of contradictions and their solutions?
dialectical materialism

What volcanic crater overlooks Honolulu port?
Diamond Head

On what island is Honolulu?
Oahu

What state is known as ``the Diamond State''?
Delaware

What early Italian goddess was associated with hunting, virginity, and the moon?
Diana

(b. 1944) What American pop and soul singer was the lead singer of the Supremes but went on to become a successful solo artist, having portrayed Billie Holiday in the movie Lady sings the blues (1972)?
Diana Ross

What American actress appeared in Annie Hall (1977), The godfather (1972, and its sequels 1974 and 1990), The first wives' club (1996), and Something's gotta give (2003)?
Diane Keaton

(b. 1933) What American politician served as the mayor of San Francisco, California (1978--88) before becoming a senator (1992--)?
Dianne Feinstein

What genus of plants includes the pinks and carnations?
Dianthus

What word that primarily refers to an organ stop sounding a main register of flue pipes of eight-foot pitch can, in the literary sense, refer to the entire compass, range, or scope of something?
diapason

What name is given to a period of suspended development in an insect, another invertebrate, or mammal embryo, especially during unfavourable environmental conditions?
diapause

What name is given to the passage of blood cells through the intact walls of the capillaries, typically accompanying inflammation?
diapedesis

What low-pitched fog signal operated by compressed air is characterized by the ``grunt'' that ends each note?
diaphone

What enzyme of the flavoprotein type can oxidize a reduced form of NAD?
diaphorase

What is the technical term for sweating?
diaphoresis

What name is given to the shaft or central part of a long bone?
diaphysis

What is an interloper?
one that intrudes in a place or sphere of activity

In what domed rock formation has a rock core moved upward to pierce the overlying strata?
diapir

(c. 1450--1500) What Portuguese navigator and explorer was the first European to sail around the Cape of Good Hope (1488), thereby establishing a sea route from the Atlantic Ocean to Asia?
Bartolomeu Dias

What separation of the muscles along the midline of the abdomen is typical during and after pregnancy and in newborns?
diastasis recti

What name is given to a space separating teeth of different functions, especially between the biting teeth (incisors and canines) and grinding teeth (premolars and molars) in rodents and ungulates?
diastema

What is the phase of the heartbeat when the heart muscle relaxes and allows the chambers to fill with blood called?
diastole

What name is given to the four Gospels combined into a single narrative?
diatessaron

Identify the planktonic single-celled alga with a cell wall of silica of which extensive fossil deposits have been found.
diatom

What tranquillizing muscle-relaxant drug of the benzodiazepine group is used chiefly to relieve anxiety, is also called ``Valium,'' and has the chemical formula C16H13N2OCl?
diazepam

What name is given to an organic compound containing two nitrogen atoms bonded together?
diazo

What psychoanalytic procedure allows the untrammelled expression of the conscious mind to help gain insight into the unconscious?
free association

What is recourse?
turning to someone or something for help or protection

What is inculcation?
teaching and impressing by frequent repetitions or admonitions

(c. 1548--1620) What Flemish mathematician, physicist, and engineer has his proof of the equilibrium on an inclined plane on his epitaph, discovered the hydrostatic paradox, was the first to explain the tides by the attraction of the moon, was the first to relate twelve-tone equal temperament and the twelfth-root of two, was responsible for many Dutch neologisms, invented the Zeilwagen `land yacht,' and tripled the efficiency of the windmills used in pumping water out of the polders?
Simon Stevin

What poisonous, reactive gas made by the action of acids is an example of electron-deficient bonding and has the chemical formula B2H6?
diborane

To what genus do the bleeding hearts belong?
Dicentra

What name is given to a cyme in which each flowering branch gives rise to two or more branches symmetrically placed?
dichasium

What pale yellow liquid used as an insecticide and veterinary anthelmintic has the chemical formula (CH3O)2PO2CHCCl2?
dichlorvos

What is the ripening of the stamens and pistils of a flower at different times so that self-fertilization is prevented called?
dichogamy

(1706--39) What English robber was a cattle and deer thief in Essex before becoming a partner with Tom King, a notorious highway robber who was hanged for horse-stealing?
Dick Turpin

In what year was Charles Dickens born?
1812

In what year did Charles Dickens die?
1870

What medal is awarded to an animal in recognition of an act of great bravery, typically one performed during a time of military conflict by an animal attached to the armed forces?
Dickin medal

For what is ``dictamnus'' another term?
dittany of Crete

What order of insects comprises the cockroaches and mantises with a somewhat flattened form, two pairs of wings, and long spiky legs?
Dictyoptera

What drug inhibiting the replication of HIV is used in the treatment of AIDS, especially in combination with zidovudine and a synthetic analogue of a pyrimidine nucleoside?
dideoxycytidine

What queen and founder of Carthage fell in love with the shipwrecked Aeneas and killed herself when he deserted her?
Dido

What ancient sanctuary of Apollo, the site of one of the most famous oracles of the Aegean region, is close to the west coast of Asia Minor?
Didyma

What plant genus includes the dumb cane?
Dieffenbachia

What is the largest island of the Chagos Archipelago in the middle of the Indian Ocean, the site of a strategic Anglo-American naval base established in 1973?
Diego Garcia

(1886--1957) What Mexican painter inspired a revival of fresco painting in Latin America and the US, created a mural of the history of Mexico for the National Palace in Mexico City, and was married to Frida Kahlo?
Diego Rivera

(1599--1660) What Spanish painter's portraits humanized the formal Spanish tradition of idealized figures? His works include Pope Innocent X (1650), The toilet of Venus (known as The Rokeby Venus, c. 1651), and Las meninas (c. 1656).
Diego Velázquez

(c. 1465--1524) After sailing with Columbus to the New World in 1493, what Spanish conquistador began the conquest of Cuba in 1511 and later initiated expeditions to conquer Mexico?
Diego Velázquez de Cuéllar

What toxic insecticide produced by the oxidation of aldrin, now banned because of its persistence in the environment, has the chemical formula C12H8Cl6O?
dieldrin

What quantity measures the ability of a substance to store electrical energy in an electric field?
dielectric constant/relative permittivity

What name is given to the migration of uncharged particles towards the position of maximum field strength in a non-uniform electric field?
dielectrophoresis

In what addition reaction does a conjugated diene react with a compound with a double or triple bond to form a six-membered ring?
Diels--Alder reaction

What village in northwestern Vietnam was the site of a French military post that the Vietminh captured after a 55-day siege in 1954?
Dien Bien Phu

What name is given to the caudal (posterior) part of the forebrain, containing the epithalamus, thalamus, hypothalamus, ventral thalamus, and third ventricle?
diencephalon

What channel port in northern France, from which ferries run to Newhaven and elsewhere, was the scene of an unsuccessful amphibious raid by a joint force of British and Canadian troops to destroy the German-held port and airfield?
Dieppe

What name is given to a day that does not count for legal purposes?
dies non

What was the first name of the French-German engineer that invented the diesel engine?
Rudolf

What is the double dagger symbol called?
diesis

What 1521 meeting convoked by Holy Roman emperor Charles V did Martin Luther attend to the cause of Protestant reform, his teaching being formally condemned in an edict of a parallel name?
Diet of Worms

What pleasant-smelling, colourless, volatile, and highly flammable liquid has the chemical formula C2H5OC2H5?
diethyl ether

What colourless soluble liquid that is used as a solvent and antifreeze has the chemical formula (C2H4OH)2O?
diethylene glycol

(1901--92) What German-born American actress and singer who became famous as Lola in The blue angel (1930), one of many films she made with Josef von Sternberg, was also successful as an international cabaret star from the 1950s?
Marlene Dietrich

Where did Dietrich Buxtehude work?
Lübeck

(1925--2012) What German baritone is noted for his interpretations of German lieder, particularly Schubert's song cycles?
Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau

What is the motto of the British monarch?
Dieu et mon droit

What Canadian phrase means ``fail to be voted on before the end of a legislative session''?
die on the Order Paper

What word, from the Latin for ``wander,'' refers to an unexpected and inexplicable change in a situation or someone's behaviour?
vagary

Fill in the proverb: ``different [---] for different folks.''
strokes

What name is given to a member of a principal sect of Jainism that was formed as a result of doctrinal schism in about 80 AD and continues today in parts of southern India? Its male ascetic members traditionally reject property ownership and do not wear clothes.
Digambara

What was the sixth letter of the early Greek alphabet, probably pronounced as ``w''?
digamma

What soft-brimmed felt hat is worn as part of the Australian army uniform?
digger's hat

What solitary wasp (families Sphecidae and Pompilidae) typically excavates a burrow in sandy soil, filling it with one or more paralyzed insects or spiders for its larvae to feed on?
digger wasp

What drug is prepared from the dried leaves of foxgloves and contains substances that stimulate the heart muscle?
digitalis

What adjective describes something shaped like a spread hand?
digitate

What situation in which two languages (or two varieties of the same language) are used under different conditions within a community, often by the same speakers, is usually referenced with respect to languages with distinct ``high'' and ``low'' (colloquial) varieties, such as Arabic?
diglossia

What poisonous compound present in the foxglove and other plants is a steroid glycoside and used in small doses as a cardiac stimulant?
digoxin

What name is given to a combination of two letters representing one sound or a ligature?
digraph

What synthetic compound with strong reducing properties is used in lotions for colouring the skin in sunlight and has the chemical formula (CH2OH)CO?
dihydroxyacetone

What is the capital of Burgundy?
Dijon

What German-derived word refers to an order or decree imposed by someone in power without popular consent?
diktat

What phenomenon exhibited by some fluids, sols, and gels involves the substance becoming more viscous or solid under pressure?
dilatancy

What noun, from the Italian for ``person loving the arts,'' refers to someone who cultivates an area of interest without real commitment or knowledge?
dilettante

What earliest of the large bipedal dinosaurs had two long crests on the head and occurred in the early Jurassic period?
dilophosaurus

(1913--65) What English broadcaster was the BBC's first news correspondent (1936) and was particularly noted for his radio and television commentaries on royal, national, and international events?
Richard Dimbleby

What is a molecule or molecular complex consisting of two identical molecules linked together called?
dimer

What colourless, oily liquid with an unpleasant smell is used as an antidote for poisoning by mercury, arsenic, lead, and other heavy metals and has the chemical formula CH2(SH)CH(SH)CH2OH?
dimercaprol

What line of verse consists of two metrical feet?
dimeter

What colourless liquid used as a solvent and synthetic reagent is readily able to penetrate the skin, is used in medicinal preparations for skin application, and has the chemical formula (CH3)2SO?
dimethyl sulphoxide

What large fossil carnivorous mammal-like reptile of the Permian period had long spines on its back supporting a sail-like crest?
dimetrodon

What name is attributed to the combination of two coats of arms by juxtaposing the dexter half of one and the sinister half of the other on a single shield (a practice primarily superseded by impalement)?
dimidiation

What hard-wearing cotton fabric is woven with stripes or checks?
dimity

What does ``DIMM'' abbreviate in computing?
dual in-line memory module

What Chinese dish consists of small steamed or fried savoury dumplings containing various fillings?
dim sum

What basic monetary unit of Serbia is equivalent to 100 paras?
dinar

What basic monetary unit of Jordan, Bahrain, and Iraq is equivalent to 1000 fils?
dinar

What basic monetary unit of Libya is equivalent to 1000 dirhams?
dinar

What monetary unit of Iran is equivalent to one-hundredth of a rial?
dinar

What Balkan mountain range running parallel to the Adriatic coast from Slovenia in the north-west, through Croatia, Bosnia, and Montenegro, to Albania in the south-east peaks at Maja Jezercë?
Dinaric Alps

What Kantian phrase refers to a thing as it is in itself, not mediated through perception by the senses or conceptualization, and therefore unknowable?
Ding an sich

What literary or dialectic noun refers to a deep wooded valley or dell?
dingle

What Nilotic language of people with the same name is spoken by over one million people in Sudan?
Dinka

State another name for the quelea.
dioch; weaver bird

(245--313) Faced with mounting military problems, who divided the Roman Empire between himself in the east and Maximian in the west in 286 and launched the final persecution of the Christians in 303?
Diocletian

(c. 400--c. 325 BC) This Greek philosopher lived ascetically in Athens (lived in a tub according to legend) and was accordingly nicknamed Kuōn `the dog,' from which the Cynics derived their name. Identify this most famous Cynic who emphasized self-sufficiency and the need for natural, uninhibited behaviour, regardless of social conventions?
Diogenes

What satellite of Saturn, the twelfth closest to the planet, was discovered by Cassini in 1684? The icy moon has a partly cratered and partly smooth surface and a diameter of 1,120 km.
Dione

(d. c. 250, feast day: 9 October) What Italian-born French bishop and patron saint of France --- known as ``Dionysius'' --- was one of seven missionaries sent from Rome to convert Gaul according to tradition, became bishop of Paris, and was martyred in the reign of the emperor Valerian?
St. Denis

(d. c. 556) This Scythian monk is famous for introducing the system of dates BC and AD that is still in use today, accepting 753 AUC as the year of the Incarnation, though this is inaccurate. Identify this scholar who is said to have taken his nickname ``little'' as a sign of humility.
Dionysius Exiguus

(1st century BC) What Greek historian, literary critic, and rhetorician lived in Rome from 30 BC and is best known for his detailed Greek history of the city that covers the period from the earliest times until the outbreak of the First Punic War (264 BC)?
Dionysius of Halicarnassus

According to tradition, this churchman, whose conversion by St. Paul is recorded in Acts 17.34, went on to become the first bishop of Athens. Identify this Greek, who was later confused with St. Denis and with a mystical theologian, Pseudo [---], who exercised a profound influence on medieval theology?
Dionysius the Areopagite

(fl. c. 250 AD) What Greek mathematician was the first to attempt an algebraical notation, showing in his Arithmetica how to solve simple and quadratic equations, his work leading to Fermat's discoveries in number theory?
Diophantus

What mineral occurring as white to pale green crystals in metamorphic and basic igneous rocks consists of a calcium and magnesium silicate of the pyroxene group, often containing iron and chromium?
diopside

What unit of refractive power is equal to the reciprocal of the focal length (in metres) of a given lens?
dioptre

By what name are the twins Castor and Pollux known collectively?
Dioscuri

What twins comprise Dioscuri?
Castor, Pollux

What highly toxic heterocyclic organochlorine compound produced as a byproduct in some manufacturing processes, notably herbicide production and paper bleaching, is a persistent environmental pollutant with the chemical formula C12H4O2Cl4 (TCDD)?
dioxin

Who said that ``the true logic of this world is in the calculus of probabilities''?
James Clerk Maxwell

What New Latin phrase means ``contradiction in terms'' or, literally, ``contradiction in what is added''?
contradictio in adjecto

What American philosopher of science first described the ``paradigm shift'' and was accused of plagiarism by Michael Polanyi?
Thomas Kuhn

What American physicist, Nobel laureate (1989), and Harvard professor is celebrated for his contributions to the development of atomic clocks and helped found Brookhaven and Fermilab?
Norman Ramsey

What antihistamine compound used for the symptomatic relief of allergies has the chemical formula C17H21NO?
diphenhydramine

What synthetic crystalline compound with basic properties, used in making azo dyes and as an insecticide and larvicide, has the chemical formula (C6H5)2NH?
diphenylamine

What synthetic compound used as a reagent for analyzing and separating lead and other metals has the chemical formula C13H12N4S?
dithizone

What acute and highly contagious disease that induces inflammation of the mucous membranes, formation of a false membrane in the throat that hinders breathing and swallowing, and potentially fatal heart and nerve damage by a bacterial toxin in the blood is caused by Klebs--Löffler bacillus in humans?
diphtheria

What bacterium --- a Gram-positive non-motile club-shaped rod --- sometimes causes disease in humans and other animals, including diphtheria?
corynebacterium

What sound formed by the combination of two vowels in a single syllable begins as one vowel and moves toward another?
diphthong

Define ``tutelary.''
having the guardianship of a person or a thing

What book mentioned in the Hebrew Bible, considered a lost non-canonical book, is called Sefer HaYashar?
Book of Jasher

Define ``credulity.''
readiness or willingness to believe especially on slight or uncertain evidence

What adjective is used to describe a fish's approximately symmetrical tail that has the vertebral column continuing to the tip, as in lampreys?
diphycercal

What is the paralysis of corresponding parts on both sides of the body, typically affecting the legs more severely than the arms?
diplegia

What 1695 work of Leibniz was a collection of originals of important public documents, many of which dealt with international affairs?
Codex Juris Gentium Diplomaticus

What is the technical term for double vision?
diplopia

What class of myriapod arthropods comprises the millipedes?
Diplopoda

During what stage of the prophase of meiosis --- the fourth, following the pachytene --- do the paired chromosomes begin to separate into two pairs of chromatids?
diplotene

What order of small primitive wingless insects comprises creatures resemblant of the true bristletails with two bristles at the end of the abdomen?
Diplura

What name is given to alcoholism in a form characterized by intermittent bouts of craving for alcohol?
dipsomania

What large order of insects that comprises the two-winged or true flies, which have the hindwings reduced to form balancing organs (halteres), includes many biting forms such as mosquitoes and tsetse flies that are vectors of disease?
Diptera

What adjective is used to describe something with a double peristyle?
dipteral

What architectural name is given to a row of columns surrounding a space within a building---like a court or internal garden---or edging a veranda or porch?
peristyle

What is a dipteran?
fly

What name is attributed to a painting, especially an altarpiece, on two hinged wooden panels that may be closed like a book or an ancient writing tablet consisting of two hinged leaves with waxed inner sides?
diptych

What synthetic drug used as a coronary vasodilator to treat angina also reduces platelet aggregation and hence the chance of thrombosis?
dipyridamole

What synthetic compound used in controlling plant growth, often as a non-persistent contact herbicide, has the chemical formula (C5H4NCH2)2Br2?
diquat

(1902--84) What English theoretical physicist described the properties of the electron, including its spin, and postulated the existence of the positron by applying Einstein's relativity to quantum mechanics? He won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1933.
Paul Dirac

What monetary unit of Tajikistan is equal to one hundredth of a somoni?
diram

What large extinct wolf (Canis dirus) of the Pleistocene epoch preyed on large mammals?
dire wolf

What adjective refers to a neoclassical decorative style intermediate between the more ornate Louis XVI style and the Empire style that was prevalent during the French Directory (1795--99)?
Directoire

What name for a lament for the dead---particularly one forming part of a funeral rite---comes from the Latin for ``direct,'' the first word of an antiphon (Ps. 5.8) formerly used in the Latin Office for the Dead?
dirge

What basic monetary unit of Morocco and the United Arab Emirates is equivalent to 100 centimes in Morocco and 100 fils in the United Arab Emirates?
dirham

What monetary unit of Libya and Qatar is equal to one thousandth of a dinar in Libya and one hundredth of a riyal in Qatar?
dirham

From the Latin ``to direct,'' what noun refers to state control of economic and social matters?
dirigisme

What factor in ecclesiastical law invalidates a marriage, such as the existence of a prior marriage?
diriment impediment

What short thrusting dagger was carried by Scottish Highlanders during the Age of Sail?
dirk

What name for a full, wide skirt with a tight waistband comes from a south German word for ``girl''?
dirndl

On what island was Tycho Brahe's observatory?
Hven

What Danish astronomer was the first person to estimate the speed of light (1676) by timing the eclipses of Io?
Rømer

What two scientists---an Englishman and a Frenchman---simultaneously and independently conjectured the existence of Neptune?
John Adams, Urbain Le Verrier

Whose experiment measuring the force of gravitational attraction between pairs of lead spheres allows one to calculate the gravitational constant?
Henry Cavendish

Whose experiment exhibits the equivalence of inertial mass and gravitational mass?
Eötvös Loránd

Define ``discommode.''
cause someone trouble or inconvenience

What check results when a player moves a piece or pawn to put the opponent's king in check from another piece?
discovered check

Define ``disembogue.''
to flow or come forth from or as if from a channel

What is a female entertainer performing monologues called? The term comes from the French for ``talker.''
diseuse

What noun --- from the French for ``undressed'' --- refers to the state of being only partly or scantily clothed?
dishabille

What literary noun --- from the Italian for ``unembarrassed'' --- refers to self-assurance or lack of constraint?
disinvoltura

Define ``disinter.''
dig up

What Latin plural noun --- an alteration of a Horatian phrase --- refers to scattered fragments, especially of written work?
disjecta membra

What Horatian phrase translates to ``limbs of a dismembered poet''?
disjecti membra poetae

What does ``DOE'' abbreviate?
disk operating system

What island --- with extensive coal deposits on the western coast of Greenland --- has its chief settlement is Godhavn?
Disko

What area of swampland in southeastern Virginia and northeastern North Carolina has a depressing name?
Great Dismal Swamp

Where is Disney World located?
Lake Buena Vista

What is the condition of having a chromosome represented twice in a chromosomal complement?
disomy

What noun is associated with a belief in a system of historical progression, as revealed in the Bible, consisting of a series of stages in God's self-revelation and plan of salvation?
dispensationalism

What animal or human activity that seems inappropriate to the context, such as head-scratching when one is confused, is considered to arise unconsciously when a conflict between antagonistic urges cannot be resolved?
displacement activity

In what chemical reaction is a substance simultaneously oxidized and reduced, giving two different products?
disproportionation

What word refers to either debate or an academic exercise in oral defence of a thesis by formal logic?
disputation

Define ``disparate.''
essentially different in kind; not allowing comparison

What British statesman --- prime minister 1868 and 1874--80 --- was primarily responsible for introducing the second Reform Act (1867), ensured that Britain bought a controlling interest in the Suez Canal (1875), and made Queen Victoria empress of India?
Benjamin Disraeli

What verb means to reduce a sailor to a lower rank?
disrate

What name is given to part of a plant that serves to propagate it, such as a seed or a fruit?
disseminule

Define ``dissension.''
disagreement that leads to discord

What botanical and zoological term refers to a partition in a part or organ, such as a septum?
dissepiment

What linguistic verb means to change a sound in a word to be unlike the sounds near it?
dissimilate

Define ``dissimilitude.''
dissimilarity; diversity

What verb from the Latin for ``hidden'' or ``concealed'' means ``to conceal or disguise one's thoughts, feelings, or character''?
dissimulate

What mental condition is characterized by the existence of two or more different personality states, with distinct behaviour, memory, and cognition, in one individual?
dissociative identity disorder

What is the opposite of persuasion?
dissuasion

What is the technical term for the symmetrical relation of mirror images, the left and right hands, or crystals with two corresponding forms?
dissymmetry

Who said, ``The limit of my language is the limit of my world''?
Ludwig Wittgenstein

What word from the Latin for ``makeweight'' refers to the part of a logarithm that follows the decimal point or the part of a floating-point number that represents the significant digits of that number?
mantissa

Onto what stick or spindle is wool or flax wound for spinning?
distaff

To what does ``the distaff side'' refer?
the female side of a family

What anatomical adjective means ``situated away from the centre of the body or from the point of attachment''?
distal

What is a distich?
pair of verse lines; couplet

What American or British military decoration is awarded for heroism or distinguished achievement while on aerial duty?
Distinguished Flying Cross

What name is attributed to a belief in two gods, especially as independent and opposed principles of good and evil?
ditheism

What synthetic compound that is used as a reagent for the analysis and separation of lead and other metals has the chemical formula C13H12N4S?
dithizone

To whom were dithyrambs dedicated?
Dionysus

What term refers to a mistaken repetition of a letter, word, or phrase by a copyist?
dittography

What literary verb from the Latin for ``wandered about'' means ``stray or digress''?
divagate

What Hindu festival of lights, held from October to November, is mainly associated with Lakshmi, the goddess of prosperity, and marks the beginning of the fiscal year in India?
Diwali

What name was given to the privy council of the Ottoman Empire or a legislative body elsewhere in the Middle East?
divan

What technical or literary verb from the Latin for ``stretched apart'' means stretch, spread apart, or diverge widely?
divaricate

What Indic language --- also called Maldivian --- is spoken in the Maldives?
Divehi

What word refers to a blind tube leading from a cavity or passage or --- in medicine --- an abnormal sac or pouch formed at a weak point in the wall of the alimentary tract?
diverticulum

What short dance within a ballet displays a dancer's technical skill without advancing the plot or character development?
divertissement

What literary noun refers to a typical or hypothetical rich man?
Dives

What is divestiture?
the action or process of selling off subsidiary business interests or investments

What doctrine that kings derive their authority from God, not from their subjects---from which it follows that rebellion is the worst of political crimes---was claimed in Britain by the earlier Stuarts and is also associated with the absolutism of Louis XIV of France?
divine right of kings

In what open-bottomed chamber supplied with compressed air can a person be let down underwater?
diving bell

What small, stocky seabird resemblant of an auk --- genus Pelecanoides --- has black upper parts and white underparts and frequents southern oceans?
diving petrel

What refers to a piece of turf cut out of the ground by a golf club?
divot

Define ``divulge.''
to make known (something private or sensitive)

What name is given to a central finance department, chief administrative office, or regional governing body in Islamic societies?
diwan

What term that originated in New Orleans in the early twentieth century refers to a kind of jazz with a solid two-beat rhythm and collective improvisation?
Dixieland

What Turkish city on the Tigris --- historically Amida --- whose modern spelling refers to its region's abundance of copper is the capital of a province of the same name?
Diyarbakir

Define ``endogenous.''
having an internal cause or origin

What are fraternal twins called?
dizygotic

What was Jakarta called before 1949?
Batavia

What is the colloquial Arabic form for ``mountain''?
jebel

What loose hooded --- typically woollen --- cloak with full sleeves whose name is of Moroccan Arabic origin is traditionally worn by Arabs?
djellaba

What is a djembe?
goblet-shaped hand drum originating in West Africa

What intelligent spirit of lower rank than the angels of Arabian and Muslim mythology can appear in human and animal forms and possess humans?
jinn

What does ``DLL'' abbreviate in computing?
dynamic link library (a collection of subroutines stored on disk, which can be loaded into memory and executed when accessed by a running program)

What acetylcholinesterase inhibitor is used as a topical treatment for skin wrinkles and sometimes suggested to be helpful in certain mental conditions?
DMAE (dimethylaminoethanol)

What severe form of muscular dystrophy---named after the French neurologist who first described it---is caused by a genetic defect and usually affects boys?
Duchenne muscular dystrophy

What law states that for every proposition, either it or its negation is true?
law of the excluded middle

What river in eastern Europe rises in Russia west of Moscow and flows south for about 2,200 km through Ukraine to the Black Sea?
Dnipro

What industrial city and river port in Ukraine was called ``Kamenskoye'' until 1936?
Dniprodzerzhinsk

What industrial city and river port in Ukraine was called ``Yekaterinoslav'' until 1926?
Dnipropetrovsk

What does DNR abbreviate?
do not resuscitate

What mechanism attached to a loom for weaving small patterns is similar to but more simple than those produced by a Jacquard loom?
dobby

What rich cake made of alternate layers of sponge and chocolate or mocha cream with a crisp caramel topping is named after a Hungarian pastry cook?
Dobos torte

What basic monetary unit of São Tomé and Principe is equal to 100 centavos?
dobra

What district of eastern Romania and northeastern Bulgaria on the Black Sea coast is bounded on the north and west by the Danube River?
Dobruja

What unit of measurement for the total amount of ozone in the atmosphere above a point on the earth's surface is equivalent to a layer of pure ozone 0.01 mm thick at standard temperature and pressure?
Dobson unit

What Gnostic doctrine supposes that Christ's body was not human, but either a phantasm or of celestial substance, so his sufferings were only apparent?
Docetism

When is St. Alphonsus Liguori's feast day?
1 August

What lattice refers to the fourteen different three-dimensional configurations into which atoms can be arranged in crystals?
Bravais lattice

What is the generalization of the parallelepiped and parallelogram called?
parallelotope

What name is given to a partition of a plane with points into convex polygons such that each polygon contains exactly one generating point and every point in a given polygon is closer to its generating point than to any other?
Voronoi diagram

What name is attributed to the number of equivalent hyperspheres that can touch an equivalent hypersphere without any intersections?
kissing number

What surveying instrument has a rotating telescope for measuring horizontal and vertical angles?
theodolite

What teacher of St. Thomas Aquinas is known as ``Doctor Universalis''?
St. Albertus Magnus

To a first approximation, the London force between two molecules is inversely proportional to what power of the distance of separation?
seventh

In what four ``mythologically inseparable'' manners do threats to the stability of cultural tradition tend to occupy?
rapid natural environmental shift, contact with an isolated foreign culture, application of novel linguistically or episodically mediated critical skill, revolutionary heroic activity

Define ``senescent.''
deteriorating; old; mature

Let $f$ be a map from a set $A$ to a set $B$. If $f(A) = B$, then what is $f$ called?
surjective

Let $f$ be a map from a set $A$ to a set $B$. If the pre-image of every element in $B$ under $f$ consists of at most one element, then what is $f$ called?
injective

What template sets out the format and tag structure of an XML- or SGML-compliant document?
document type definition (DTD)

How many faces does a dodecahedron have?
twelve

What shape are the faces of a dodecahedron?
pentagon

Of what group of twelve islands is Rhodes the largest?
Dodecanese

What city in southwestern Kansas was established in 1872 as a railhead on the Santa Fe Trail and rapidly gained a reputation as a rowdy frontier town?
Dodge City

What burrowing bivalve mollusk (family Glycimeridae) has a highly convex, almost spherical shell?
dog cockle

What name was given to the chief magistrate of Venice or Genoa?
doge

What small pointed ornament is repeated along a moulding consisting of four petals radiating from a raised centre, used primarily in the Early English style?
dogtooth

What phrase from Shakespeare's Julius Caesar (3.1.276) refers to the havoc accompanying military conflict?
the dogs of war

What canine proverb means that you cannot make people change their established opinion and behaviour patterns?
you can't teach an old dog new tricks

What canine proverb means that everyone will have good luck or success at some point in their lives?
every dog has its day

What does ``DOHC'' abbreviate?
double overhead camshaft

What does ``DOI'' abbreviate?
digital object identifier

What Italian phrase refers to pleasant idleness --- literally ``sweet doing nothing''?
dolce far niente

If you have a relatively long skull, with what adjective might someone describe you?
dolichocephalic

From what Dickens novel is the sentence ``Silas Wegg, being on his road to the Roman Empire, approaches it by way of Clerkenwell''?
Our mutual friend

Who coined the term ``cultural capital''?
Pierre Bourdieu

Who said that ``the judges were right when they finally told the accused that all [Eichmann] had said was `empty talk'''?
Hannah Arendt

What is repetition at the end of successive clauses called?
epistrophe

What is the repetition of the end of a clause at the beginning of the following clause called?
anadiplosis

What countries bound France?
Andorra, Belgium, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Monaco, Spain, Switzerland

What city and country produce the finest china?
Limoges, France/Severes, France/Dresden, Germany/Copenhagen, Denmark

Where is the River Volga?
Russia

What is the finest cotton grown?
Sea Island cotton/Egyptian cotton

What country consumed the most tea before the war?
Russia

What city in the United States leads in making laundry machines?
Chicago

What city is the fur centre of the United States?
St. Louis/New York

(1842--1923) What Scottish chemist and physicist devised the vacuum flask, achieved temperatures close to absolute zero, and was the first to produce liquid oxygen and hydrogen in quantity?
Sir James Dewar

Where is Copenhagen?
Denmark

Where is Spitsbergen?
Svalbard, Norway

To what country other than Australia are kangaroos native?
Papua New Guinea

Who was Bessemer and what did he do?
English engineer who invented a process for making steel by taking carbon out of molten iron by the air blast

Whence do we get prunes?
Santa Clara Valley and elsewhere

Who was John Hancock?
the first signer of the Declaration of Independence

Who was Plutarch?
Greek of the first and second centuries AD who wrote Parallel lives

Who was Hannibal?
the Carthaginian general who conquered most of Italy in the third century BC

Who was Danton?
French Revolutionary orator who was sent to the guillotine by the Committee of Terror

Who was Solon?
Athenian lawgiver, famous for twenty-three centuries for the remark to Croesus (that modern historians say he did not make) to ``Count no man happy until he is dead''

Who was Francis Marion?
principal leader of the Revolutionary forces in the Southern States

Who was Leonidas?
the Spartan general who led the heroic defence of Thermopylae

Where did the United States get Louisiana from?
France

Who was Pizarro?
the Spanish conqueror of Peru

Who was Bolívar?
the hero of the South American wars of liberation from Spain

What war material did Chile export to the Allies during the war?
nitrates

Where does most coffee come from?
Brazil

Where was Napoleon born?
Ajaccio, Corsica

What is the highest rise of tide on the North American Coast?
seventy feet in the Bay of Fundy

Who invented logarithms?
John Napier

Who was the Emperor of Mexico when Cortez landed?
Montezuma

Where is the Imperial Valley?
Southern California on the Mexican border

What is the Imperial Valley noted for?
melons

What and where is the Sargasso Sea?
vast tract of seaweed in the North Atlantic Ocean

Name a large inland body of water that has no outlet.
Great Salt Lake

What is the capital of Pennsylvania?
Harrisburg

Rhode Island is the smallest state. What is the next?
Delaware

What is the third-smallest state?
Connecticut

How far is it from New York to Liverpool?
3,167.5 nautical miles

Of what state is Helena the capital?
Montana

Of what state is Tallahassee the capital?
Florida

What state has the largest amethyst mines?
Virginia

What is the name of a famous violin maker (the most prominent one)?
Stradivarius

Who invented the modern paper-making machine?
Robert (not Fourdrinier)

Who invented the typesetting machine?
Mergenthaler

How is leather tanned?
by immersion in an infusion of oak or hemlock bark or other material strong in tannic acid

What is artificial silk made from?
cotton or wood pulp treated with acids and drawn into threads

What is a caisson?
enclosure to keep water from seeping or flowing into a space where engineering operations are taking place

What is shellac?
base for varnish made from lac, which is resinous incrustation formed on certain trees in the East Indies by an insect resembling the cochineal

What is celluloid made from?
wood pulp (primarily)

What causes the tides?
the gravitational pull of the moon exerted powerfully on the ocean because of its fluidity, and weakly on the earth because of its comparative rigidity

What is coke?
coal after the more volatile components have been driven from it by heat

From what part of the North Atlantic do we get codfish?
off the Newfoundland Banks

What is a monsoon?
seasonal prevailing wind in the region of South and Southeast Asia, blowing from the southwest in summer and from the northeast in winter

From where do we import figs?
Smyrna

Where do we get our domestic sardines?
California, Maine

Where is Kenosha?
Wisconsin

What is the speed of sound in dry air at freezing?
1,091 feet/second

What is the speed of sound in water?
4,680 feet/second

Who was Cleopatra and how did she die?
queen of Egypt and contemporary of Julius Caesar and Mark Antony who committed suicide by making an asp bite her

Where are condors found?
Andes

Who discovered the law of gravitation?
Sir Isaac Newton

What is the distance between the earth and sun?
93,100,000 miles

Why is cast iron called pig iron?
fancied resemblance of the row of channels into which the molten flows to a litter of pigs

Who discovered radium?
Marie Curie

Who discovered the X-ray?
Roentgen

What is the capital of Alabama?
Montgomery

Who composed Il trovatore?
Verdi

Where is platinum found?
Ural Mountains

From where do we get sulphur?
Louisiana, Texas

Who discovered how to vulcanize rubber?
Charles Goodyear

What is vulcanite and how is it made?
black variety of hard rubber capable of being cut and polished, made from the cheaper grades of rubber from Borneo and Java vulcanized with much sulphur

Who invented the cotton gin?
Eli Whitney

What is the difference between anthracite and bituminous coal?
hard coal is anthracite and soft coal is bituminous

From where do we get benzol?
fractional distillation of coal tar

What is a foot pound?
unit of energy equal to the work done in raising one pound of avoirdupois against the force of gravity one foot

Where is the St. Gothard pass?
Alps

Who wrote Les miserables?
Victor Hugo

Who made ``The thinker''?
Auguste Rodin

What is copra?
dried kernel of the coconut

What is the heaviest kind of wood?
lignum vitae

What is the lightest wood?
basswood/balsa

What Swedish chemist discovered glycerol, chlorine, and oxygen?
Carl Wilhelm Scheele

Who was the first person reliably documented to have used light-sensitive chemicals to capture silhouette images on durable media such as paper and the first known to have attempted to photograph the image formed in a camera obscura?
Thomas Wedgwood

What English-born American scientist, philosopher, physician, chemist, historian, and photographer is credited with producing the first clear photograph of a female face and the first detailed photograph of the moon in 1840?
John William Draper

What large hat with one side drooping and with a floral trimming, formerly worn by women, is named after a character in Dickens's Barnaby Rudge?
Dolly Varden

What dish consisting of ingredients such as meat and spiced rice wrapped in vine or cabbage leaves is popular in the Balkans, the Caucasus, and the eastern Mediterranean?
dolma

What megalithic tomb with a large flat stone laid on upright ones is found chiefly in Britain and France?
dolmen

What literary noun refers to a state of great sorrow or distress?
dolour

What Spanish politician and leader of the Republicans during the Spanish Civil War is known as ``La Pasionaria''?
Dolores Ibárruri Gómez

What title is prefixed to the names of some Roman Catholic dignitaries and Benedictine and Carthusian monks?
Dom

What word from the French for ``estate'' refers to a vineyard?
domaine

What comprehensive record of the extent, value, ownership, and liabilities of land in England was made in 1086 by order of William I?
Domesday

What word from the French for ``servant'' refers to a cyclist in a road racing team whose role is to help their team leader during a race, for example, by setting the pace or creating a slipstream?
domestique

What formal word refers to the country that a person treats as their permanent home or lives in and has a substantial connection with?
domicile

(c. 1170--1221, feast day: 8 August) What Spanish priest and friar founded the Order of Friars Preachers at Toulouse in France in 1216, whose members became known as ``Black Friars''?
St. Dominic

What name is given to any of the seven letters A--G used in church calendars to indicate the date (1--7 January) on which the first Sunday in the year falls, hence in dating movable feasts?
dominical letter

Who was the son of Vespasian and the younger brother of Titus?
Domitian

What Sinhalese statesman and prime minister presided over Ceylon's achievement of full dominion status within the Commonwealth?
Don Stephen Senanayake

(1386--1466) What Italian sculptor was one of the pioneers of scientific perspective and is known for his lifelike sculptures, including the bronze David (c. 1430--60)?
Donatello

(1444--1514) What Italian architect drew up the first plan for St. Peter's Cathedral, which was begun in 1506, and established the concept of a large central dome?
Donato Bramante

What series of Lower Pleistocene glaciations in the Alps preceded the Günz?
Donau

What basic monetary unit of Vietnam is equal to 100 xu?
dong

What river in Vietnam flows for 483 km from south-central Vietnam to join the Saigon River below Ho Chi Minh City?
Dong-nai River

(1797--1848) What Italian composer's operas include tragedies such as Lucia di Lammermoor (1835) and comedies such as Don Pasquale (1843)?
Gaetano Donizetti

What is the great tower or innermost keep of a castle called?
donjon

What equilibrium is reached between two ionic solutions separated by a semipermeable membrane when one or more of the kinds of ion present cannot pass through the membrane, resulting in a difference in osmotic pressure and electrical potential between the solutions?
Donnan equilibrium

What British proverb means ``don't risk the failure of a large project by trying to economize on trivial things''?
don't spoil the ship for a ha'p'orth of tar

What German-derived noun means ``enjoyment obtained from the troubles of others''?
schadenfreude

What word from the Greek for ``all-healing'' refers to ``a remedy for all ills or difficulties''?
panacea

What word refers to ``social instability resulting from a breakdown of standards and values'' or ``personal unrest, alienation, and uncertainty that comes from a lack of purpose or ideals''?
anomie

What does Matthew 13.35 say?
This was to fulfill what was spoken by the prophet: ``I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter what has been hidden since the foundation of the world.''

What resort region (``peninsula'') in northeastern Wisconsin lies between Green Bay and Lake Michigan?
Door Peninsula

What ``reward pathway'' compound --- chemical formula C8H11NO2 --- is present in the body as a neurotransmitter and a precursor of other substances such as epinephrine?
dopamine

What is a flock of shelduck called?
dopping

A dopping is a flock of what?
shelduck

Where was Doppler from?
Austria

What southern constellation (the Goldfish) contains most of the Large Magellanic Cloud?
Dorado

What is another term for mahimahi?
dorado

(1906--88) What Hungarian-born American composer and conductor was the musical director of symphonies in Dallas (1945--49), Minneapolis (1949--60), Stockholm (1966--70), Washington, DC (1970--77), and Detroit (1977--81)?
Doráti Antal

What river in western France rises in the Auvergne region and flows west for 472 km to meet the Garonne River and form the Gironde estuary?
Dordogne

What industrial city and river port in the Netherlands near the mouth of the Rhine River is 19 km southeast of Rotterdam?
Dordrecht

What mode is represented by the natural diatonic scale D--D?
Dorian

What is the passing of the Virgin Mary from earthly life called?
Dormition

What prehistoric culture flourished in the American Arctic during the first millennium AD and was displaced by the Thule culture?
Dorset

What rare word from the Greek for ``spear carrier'' refers to a pedantic and annoyingly persistent critic?
doryphore

(c. 205--270) What philosopher, probably of Roman descent, was the founder and leading exponent of Neoplatonism?
Plotinus

Why can ``spiritual wisdom'' be ``reduced to'' narrative form?
the word has a deceptively simple, yet infinitely meaningful ``triggering'' property (254)

Why is the word in ``meaningful context'' meaningful?
it provides information relevant to episodic representation per se and it has behavioural relevance

What name is given to each of three energies believed to circulate in the body and govern physiological activity?
dosha

What device is used to measure an absorbed dose of ionizing radiation?
dosimeter

What ornamental cloth is hung behind an altar in a church or at the sides of a chancel?
dossal

What English translation of the Bible formerly used in the Roman Catholic Church was completed at a commune of the same name in France early in the seventeenth century?
Douay Bible

Whose Nova Stereometria dolorium vinariorum `New solid geometry of wine barrels,' inspired by a wine barrel seller's use of the gauge rod leading up to his second wedding in Linz, explored integral calculus?
Johannes Kepler

(feast day: 21 December) What apostle acquired his nickname because he said that he would not believe that Jesus had risen again until he had seen and touched his wounds (John 20.24--29)?
St. Thomas

What river on the Iberian peninsula rises in central Spain and flows west for 900 km through Portugal to the Atlantic Ocean near Oporto?
Douro

Define ``dour.''
stern, harsh; obstinate, unyielding; gloomy, sullen

What name is given to either a true sole that is common in European waters (Solea solea, family Soleidae) or a relative of the lemon sole found in the eastern Pacific (Microstomus pacificus, family Pleuronectidae)?
Dover sole

Name the six counties of Northern Ireland.
Antrim, Armagh, Down, Fermanagh, Londonderry, Tyrone

What is the reduction at the cellular level of the magnitude or rate of a physiological response or a biochemical process, especially of the expression of a gene, or the reduction of the number or density of cell surface receptors for a physiologically active substance, causing a decrease in sensitivity in response to persistent exposure, called?
downregulation

What bacterial antibiotic widely used to treat leukemia and various other forms of cancer is produced by the bacterium Streptomyces peucetius caesius?
doxorubicin

What broad-spectrum antibiotic of the tetracycline group has a long half-life in the body?
doxycycline

What French-derived word refers to the most respected or prominent person in a particular field?
doyen

(1859--1930) What Scottish novelist and short-story writer is known for his creation of private detective Sherlock Holmes, who first appeared (with his friend Dr. Watson, the narrator of the stories) in A study in Scarlet (1887), The adventures of Sherlock Holmes (1892), and The hound of the Baskervilles (1902)?
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle

(1844--1901) What English impresario and producer brought together the librettist Sir W. S. Gilbert and the composer Sir Arthur Sullivan, producing many of their operettas in London's Savoy Theatre that he had established in 1881?
Richard D'Oyly Carte

What combined vaccine (an abbreviation for the three things it treats) is given to small children?
DPT

What does ``DPT'' abbreviate?
diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus

What was Dr. Seuss's name?
Theodor Seuss Geisel

What unit of weight, formerly used by apothecaries, is equivalent to 60 grains or 1/8 of an ounce?
drachma

What large northern constellation (the Dragon) with no bright stars stretches around the north celestial pole and represents the dragon killed by Hercules?
Draco

(7th century BC) What Athenian legislator's codification of Athenian law was notorious for its severity?
Draco

Who penned Dracula?
Bram Stoker

What literary noun refers to the damp remains of malt after brewing often used as an appetizer or supplement in animal rations?
draff

What word refers to either a sugar-coated nut or a small silver-coloured decorative ball?
dragée

What name is attributed to one of a series of persecutions directed by Louis XIV against French Protestants in which troops were quartered upon them?
dragonnade

In what pharmacological test is a substance introduced into the eye or applied to the skin of a laboratory animal to ascertain the likely effect of that substance on the corresponding human tissue?
Draize test

(c. 1540--96) What sailor and explorer was the first Englishman to circumnavigate the globe (1577--80) on the Golden Hind and played a crucial part in the defeat of the Spanish Armada?
Sir Francis Drake

What speculative equation estimates the likelihood of discovering intelligent extraterrestrial life in the galaxy, expressed as the product of a series of factors such as the number of stars, the fraction of stars with planets, the fraction of planets on which life evolves, the average lifetime of a civilization, etc.?
Drake equation

What area of ocean, noted for its violent storms, connects the South Atlantic Ocean with the South Pacific Ocean and separates the southern tip of South America (Cape Horn) from the Antarctic Peninsula?
Drake Passage

What mountain range in southern Africa, whose highest peak is Thabana Ntlenyana, stretches northeast for 1,126 km through Lesotho and parts of South Africa?
Drakensberg Mountains

What trademarked antihistamine compound is used to counter nausea, especially travel sickness?
Dramamine

What is the theory and practice of dramatic composition?
dramaturgy

What sweet Scotch whiskey liqueur's name comes from the Scottish Gaelic for ``satisfying drink''?
Drambuie

What was the former German policy of eastward expansion, especially that espoused under Nazi rule, called?
Drang nach Osten

What river rises in northern Italy and flows for 725 km through southern Austria, Slovenia, and Croatia to join the Danube River near Osijek and forms part of the border between Hungary and Croatia?
Drava River

What type of battleship that was introduced in the early twentieth century was larger and faster than its predecessors and equipped entirely with large-calibre guns?
dreadnought

What name is ascribed to the processes by which the unconscious mind alters the manifest content of dreams to conceal their real meaning from the dreamer?
dreamwork

On what river is Dresden?
Elbe

What is the capital of Saxony?
Dresden

(1859--1935) This French army officer was falsely accused of providing military secrets to the Germans in 1894 and was eventually fully exonerated in 1906. Whose trial and imprisonment caused a major political crisis in France?
Alfred Dreyfus

What river flows for 459 km partly along the border between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia into the Sava River west of Belgrade in Serbia?
Drina River

What device, typically conical or funnel-shaped with open ends, towed behind a boat, an aircraft, or another moving object to reduce speed or improve stability?
drogue

What is the alleged right of a medieval feudal lord to have sexual intercourse with a vassal's bride on her wedding night called?
droit de seigneur

What carnivorous bipedal dinosaur of a late Cretaceous family that included deinonychus and the velociraptors had a large slashing claw on each hind foot?
dromaeosaurid

What low four-wheeled open carriage was used in Russia?
droshky

What is the site in London of the Theatre Royal?
Drury Lane

What is an electric cell in which the electrolyte is absorbed in a solid to form a paste, preventing spillage, called?
dry cell

What island group in southwestern Florida, west of Key West, is noted for its wildlife?
Dry Tortugas

What common polypore growing on tree stumps and logs with a scaly, yellowish-brown upper surface is found in both North America and Eurasia and edible when young?
dryad saddle

(1631--1700) What English poet, critic, and playwright of the Augustan Age is best known for Marriage à la mode (1673), All for love (1678), and Absalom and Achitophel (1681)?
John Dryden

What fossil anthropoid ape of the middle Miocene to early Pliocene epochs includes the supposed common ancestor of gorillas, chimpanzees, and humans?
Dryopithecus

In what process is a print bonded to a mount using a layer of adhesive in a hot press?
dry mounting

The Leech lattice is defined in [---] dimensions.
24

What is the only nontrivial case of the sum of the first $n$ squares being a square?
$n = 24$

What unit of electric potential is $c_{\text{cgs}} 10^{-8}$ volt?
statvolt

Identify the work: ``And thus the native hue of resolution / Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought.''
Hamlet (3.1.84--85)

Who talked about ``l'homme de la nature et de la vérité''?
Rousseau

What is German for ``death''?
Tod

What does ``DSP'' abbreviate in genealogy?
decessit sine prole `died without issue'

(1743--93) What French courtier and mistress of Louis XV was arrested by the Revolutionary Tribunal and guillotined during the French Revolution?
Comtesse Du Barry

(712--770 AD) What Chinese poet is noted for his bitter satiric poems that attacked social injustice and corruption at court?
Du Fu

(1834--96) What French-born novelist, cartoonist, and illustrator is chiefly remembered for his novel Trilby (1894), which included the character Svengali and gave rise to the word ``Svengali'' for a person with a hypnotic influence on another?
George du Maurier

(1921--92) What Czech statesman---the first secretary of the Czechoslovak Communist Party (1968--69)---was the driving force behind the political reforms of 1968 that prompted the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 and his removal from office and elected speaker of the federal assembly in the new Czechoslovak parliament after the collapse of communism in 1989?
Alexander Dubček

(1901--85) What French painter rejected traditional techniques and incorporated materials such as sand and plaster in his paintings and produced sculptures made from garbage?
Jean Dubuffet

(1675--1755) What French writer is best known for his Mémoires, a detailed record of court life between 1694 and 1723 during the reigns of Louis XIV and XV?
Duc de Saint-Simon

(1887--1968) What French-born artist was a leading figure of the Dada movement and originator of conceptual art and invented ``ready-mades,'' mass-produced articles selected at random and displayed as works of art?
Marcel Duchamp

(1877--1953) What French painter and textile designer's characteristic style involved calligraphic outlines sketched on brilliant background washes?
Raoul Dufy

What amphibious transport vehicle used by the Allies during World War II was also called ``duck''?
DUKW

What extract of woody nightshade is used in homeopathy for treating skin diseases and chest complaints?
dulcamara

What traditional Argentinian dessert is made by caramelizing sugar in milk?
dulce de leche

What word refers to either an early type of bassoon made in one piece or any of various organ stops, typically with 8-foot funnel-shaped flue pipes or 8- or 16-foot reed pipes?
dulcian

What stringed instrument of trapezoidal shape is played with light hammers held in the hands?
dulcimer

What musical keyboard instrument in which hammers strike a series of steel tuning forks was invented in the late nineteenth century and superseded by the celesta?
dulcitone

What is the reverence accorded to saints and angels in Roman Catholicism?
dulia

What name is ascribed to the practice by slave-making ants of capturing the pupae of other ant species and rearing them as workers of their own colony?
dulosis

What rare blue or violet mineral typically occurs as needles and fibrous masses in gneiss and schist and consists of an aluminum and iron borosilicate?
dumortierite

What is the theoretical limit to the number of people with whom any individual can sustain a stable or meaningful social relationship?
Dunbar's number

``By all means, marry. If you get a good wife, you'll be happy. If you get a bad one, you'll become a philosopher.'' Who said this?
Socrates

``I can calculate the motion of heavenly bodies, but not the madness of people.'' Who said this?
Sir Isaac Newton

``My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass.'' From what is this?
Deut. 32.2

``History repeats itself, first as tragedy, second as farce.'' Who said this?
Karl Marx

``Our Constitution was made only for a moral and religious people. It is wholly inadequate to the government of any other.'' Who said this?
John Adams

``Politics is the ability to foretell what is going to happen tomorrow, next week, next month, and next year. And to have the ability afterwards to explain why it didn't happen.'' Who said this?
Winston Churchill

``To write well, express yourself like the common people, but think like a wise man.'' Who said this?
Aristotle

``A man has free choice to the extent that he is rational.'' Who said this?
St. Thomas Aquinas

``Though the Earth, and all inferior Creatures be common to all Men, yet every Man has a Property in his own Person. This no Body has any Right to but himself.'' Who said this?
John Locke

``Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend.'' What is this from?
Prov. 27.17

``I would rather be stricken blind / Than to live without expression of mind.'' Who said this?
Tupac Shakur

Fatti non foste a viver come bruti ma per sequir virtute e canoscenza. `You were not made to live like brute beasts, but to pursure virtue and knowledge.' Who wrote this?
Dante Alighieri

``Lies, damned lies, and statistics.'' Who said this?
Mark Twain

Who says that ``brevity is the soul of wit'' in Shakespeare's Hamlet?
Polonius (2.2.90)

``Madness is rare in the individual --- but with groups, parties, peoples, and ages it is the rule.'' Who said this?
Friedrich Nietzsche

``As the family goes, so goes the nation, and so goes the whole world in which we live.'' Who said this?
Pope John Paul II

``Everyone thinks of changing the world, but no one thinks of changing himself.'' Who said this?
Leo Tolstoy

``The mathematician is only complete insofar as he feels within himself the beauty of the true.'' Who said this?
Goethe

``The press today is an army with carefully organized weapons, the journalists its officers, the readers its soldiers. The reader neither knows nor is supposed to know the purposes for which he is used and the role he is to play.'' Who said this?
Oswald Spengler

``The great epochs of our lives come when we gain the courage to rechristen our evil as what is best in us.'' Identify the author.
Nietzsche

``Since he takes rules literally and things of good only in terms of obedience, the child will at first evaluate acts not in accordance with the motive that has prompted them but in terms of their exact conformity with established rules.'' Identify the author.
Piaget

``The man who is truly wise and kind leaves nothing to be done, but he who acts according to his nation's law leaves many things undone.'' Identify the author.
Lao Tzu

What does Matthew 5.17 say?
Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.

``Against stupidity the very gods / Themselves contend in vain.'' Identify the author.
Schiller (The Maid of Orleans)

``Days of absence, sad and dreary, / Clothed in sorrow's dark array,--- / Days of absence, I am weary: / She I love is far away.'' Identify the author.
Rousseau

Le superflu, chose très nécessaire. `The superfluous: a very necessary thing.' Identify the author. Bonus for the work.
Voltaire (Le Mondain)

``Men use thought only as authority for their injustice, and employ speech only to conceal their thoughts.'' Identify the author.
Voltaire (Dialogue xiv. Le Chapon et la Poularde)

``It may be said that his wit shines at the expense of his memory.'' Identify the author. Bonus for the work.
Alain René Le Sage (Gil Blas)

Who wrote Gil Blas?
Alain René Le Sage

``Happy who in his verse can gently steer / From grave to light, from pleasant to severe.'' Identify the author.
Nicholas Boileau-Despreaux (The Art of Poetry)

``Man is but a reed, the most feeble thing in nature; but he is a thinking reed.'' Identify the author.
Pascal (Pensées)

``Although I am a pious man, I am not the less a man.'' Identify the author.
Molière (Le Tartuffe)

``The spiritual virtue of a sacrament is like light --- although it passes among the impure, it is not polluted.'' Identify the author.
St. Augustine

``Every investigation which is guided by principles of Nature fixes its ultimate aim entirely on gratifying the stomach.'' Identify the author.
Athenæus

``This Being of mine, whatever it really is, consists of a little flesh, a little breath, and the part which governs.'' Identify the author.
Marcus Aurelius

``With man, most of his misfortunes are occasioned by man.'' Identify the author.
Pliny the Elder

``Je m'en vais chercher le grand peut-être.'' Identify the author.
François Rabelais

``Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein.'' What is this from?
Prov. 26.27

``Answer a fool according to his folly.'' What is this from?
Prov. 26.5

``Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain.'' What is this from?
Prov. 31.30

``Man doth not live by bread only.'' What is this from?
Deut. 8.3

``Add thus much more, that no Italian priest / Shall tithe or toll in our dominions.'' From what work of Shakespeare is this?
King John (3.1.153--54)

``There's small choice in rotten apples.'' From what work of Shakespeare is this?
The Taming of the Shrew (1.1.133--34)

``Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.'' From what work of Shakespeare is this?
As You Like It (3.2.384--85)

``I was promised on a time / To have reason for my rhyme; / From that time unto this season, / I received nor rhyme nor reason.'' Identify the author.
Edmund Spenser

``Anon they move / In perfect phalanx, to the Dorian mood / Of flutes and soft recorders.'' From what work is this?
Paradise Lost (1.549)

``All hell broke loose.'' From what work did this phrase come?
Paradise Lost (4.918)

``Here we may reign secure; and in my choice / To reign is worth ambition, though in hell: / Better to reign in hell than serve in heaven.'' Identify the author.
John Milton

Translate the phrase: ``Summum nec metuas diem, nec optes.''
neither fear nor wish for your last day (Martial: lib. x. epigram 47)

``When all the world dissolves, / And every creature shall be purified, / All places shall be hell that are not heaven.'' Identify the work.
Faustus

``Excess of wealth is cause of covetousness.'' Identify the work.
The Jew of Malta (1)

``Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren ground.'' Identify the work.
The Tempest (1.1.64)

Define ``sojourn.''
temporary stay

What is the more common term for Cancer magister?
Dungeness crab

What migratory sandpiper (Calidris alpina) with a down-curved bill and (in the breeding season) a reddish-brown back and black belly is the most common small wader of the northern hemisphere?
dunlin

(c. 909--88, feast day: 19 May) What Anglo-Saxon prelate introduced the strict Benedictine rule in England and succeeded in restoring monastic life as archbishop of Canterbury?
St. Dunstan

What first part of the small intestine immediately beyond the stomach leads to the jejunum?
duodenum

What condition that is marked by fixed forward curvature of one or more fingers is caused by the development of a fibrous connection between the finger tendons and the skin of the palm?
Dupuytren's contracture

What is the rigid outermost membrane enveloping the brain and spinal cord called --- medieval Latin for ``hard mother''?
dura mater

What is the heartwood of a tree called?
duramen

What was the former name of Durban?
Port Natal

What historical noun refers to either the court held by an Indian prince or a formal reception held by an Indian prince or an African ruler?
durbar

What is the German for ``through-composed''?
durchkomponiert

(1888--1979) What French composer and member of the Les Six group until 1921 later wrote music that had mass appeal in accordance with communist doctrines on art?
Louis Durey

What fierce Hindu goddess --- wife of Shiva and often associated with Kali --- is usually depicted with eight or ten arms, riding a tiger or lion, and slaying the buffalo demon?
Durga

(1858--1917) What French founder of modern sociology became the first professor of sociology at the Sorbonne in 1913 and wrote works such as The division of labor in society (1893) and Suicide (1897)?
Émile Durkheim

What name for any of a breed of large vigorous red American hogs is shared with that of a French general under Napoleon?
duroc

(1912--90) What English novelist and poet spent much of his life abroad, particularly in the Mediterranean and wrote Alexandria quartet (1957--60) and Prospero's cell (1945)?
Lawrence Durrell

What was the former name of Dushanbe?
Stalinabad

On what river is Düsseldorf?
Rhine

When was the Dutch East India company founded?
1602

When did the Dutch East India company dissolve?
1799

What fungal disease of elm trees is spread by elm bark beetles and caused by the fungus Ceratocystis ulmi?
Dutch elm disease

What name was given to one of two Roman officers or magistrates constituting a board or court?
duumvir

By whom was Gabriel Duvall appointed to the Court?
James Madison

What river rises in Russia's Valai Hills and flows west, then north, for 1,020 km across Belarus and Latvia into the Gulf of Riga?
Dvina River

(b. 1941) What American singer, songwriter, and leader of an urban folk-music revival in the 1960s who became known for political and protest songs such as ``The times they are a-changin'' (1964) wrote Highway 61 revisited (1965) and Blood on the tracks (1975) and won the Nobel Prize for Literature (2016)?
Bob Dylan

Define ``dysarthria.''
difficulty in articulating words due to disease of the central nervous system

What speech defect is caused by malformation of or imperfect distribution of nerves to the organs of articulation (as the tongue)?
dyslalia

Define ``dyspraxia.''
impairment of the ability to perform coordinated movements

What is the atomic number of dysprosium?
66

What name is given to a hybrid between the yak and the domestic cow?
dzo

What is the official language of Bhutan?
Dzongkha

What was the first name of Earl Grey?
Charles

(1905--83) What American jazz pianist and bandleader originated the ``trumpet style'' of piano playing, featuring a linear right hand?
Earl Hines

What is an earl having royal authority within his country or domain?
earl palatine

(1848--1929) What American marshal and frontiersman is best known for the gunfight at the OK Corral (1881), in which he, his brothers, and his friend Doc Holliday fought the Clanton brothers at Tombstone, Arizona?
Wyatt Earp

What region in eastern England consists of the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, as well as parts of Essex and Cambridgeshire counties?
East Anglia

What is the capital of East Flanders?
Ghent

What rare viral disease that affects horses and humans is spread by mosquitoes and occurs mainly in eastern states of the United States?
eastern equine encephalitis

In what tennis racket grip are the bottom knuckle of the index finger and the heel of the hand in contact with the top of the handle, typically used for flat forehand shots?
eastern grip

In what tennis racket grip is the bottom knuckle of the index finger in contact with the top of the handle and the heel of the hand with the bevel immediately clockwise from it (for a right-handed player)?
continental grip

In what tennis racket grip is the heel of the hand in contact with the bottom of the handle, and does the bottom knuckle of the index finger touch the bevel immediately counterclockwise from it, typically used to generate heavy topspin (for a right-handed player)?
western grip

Identify the author: ``Most of what displays itself in the showcases, for example, as `objectivity,' `being scientific,' `l'art pour l'art,' `pure knowledge, free of will,' is merely dressed-up skepticism and paralysis of the will.''
Nietzsche

What adjective describes something with an animal's form?
theriomorphic

What Latin phrase refers to the line or stem through the earth's centre connecting its surface to the underworld and the heavens and around which the universe revolves?
axis mundi

Define ``chthonic.''
of or relating to the underworld

What figure in Greek mythos was a guide of souls to the place of the dead?
psychopomp

What five parts comprise Burke's dramatistic life cycle?
order, pollution, guilt, purification, redemption

According to Burke, via what three things might we be absolved from guilt (purified)?
mortification, transcendence, victimage

What are the elements of Burke's dramaturgic Pentad?
act, agents, agency, scene, purpose

What is the difference between purpose and motive in Burke's theory of ``life as drama''?
purpose addresses why the agents broke a rule; motive justifies the rule-breaking activity in terms of element ratios

(1898--1962) This mathematician --- advised by Herglotz and Hölder --- is considered the founder of modern abstract algebra with Emmy Noether. His notable students include John Tate, Serge Lang, Max Zorn, and Bernard Dwork. Identify this Austrian who contributed to class field theory --- note his reciprocity law that partially solved Hilbert's ninth problem --- developed a new construction of $L$-functions, contributed to the theories of rings, groups, and fields --- he is the eponym a ring that satisfies the descending chain condition on ideals --- resolved Hilbert's seventeenth problem, developed the theory of braids (1925), and was an expositor of Galois theory and group-cohomological class ring theory.
Emil Artin

What name is given to the central core of the primary meristem of a plant --- that, according to the histogen theory, gives rise to the stele --- or to the stelar region in a root tip?
plerome

What is eau de Nil?
pale greenish colour

What is eau-de-vie?
brandy

What layer of the ionosphere can reflect medium-frequency radio waves?
E layer

(1911--77) What German economist and conservationist's Small is beautiful: economics as if people mattered (1973) argues that mass production needs to be replaced by smaller, more energy-efficient enterprises?
E. F. Schumacher

What does EBCDIC abbreviate?
Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code

What city in ancient Syria, situated to the southwest of Aleppo, became very powerful in the third millennium BC when it dominated a region corresponding to modern Lebanon, northern Syria, and southeastern Turkey?
Ebla

What river in northeastern Spain rises in the mountains of the Cantabria region and flows southeast for 910 km into the Mediterranean Sea?
Ebro

What herpesvirus that causes infectious mononucleosis is associated with certain cancers such as Burkitt's lymphoma?
Epstein--Barr virus

What does EBV abbreviate?
Epstein--Barr virus

What name is ascribed to a painting of Jesus Christ wearing the crown of thorns?
Ecce Homo

What is the discolouration of the skin resulting from bleeding underneath, typically caused by bruising, called?
ecchymosis

(1903--97) What Australian physiologist who demonstrated how nerve impulses are conducted by means of chemical neurotransmitters won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1963) with Alan L. Hodgkin and Andrew F. Huxley?
Sir John Carew Eccles

What adjective describes multicellular glands that do not lose cytoplasm in their secretions, especially the sweat glands found widely distributed on the skin?
eccrine

What does ``ECCS'' abbreviate?
emergency core cooling system

What is the process of shedding the old skin (in reptiles) or casting off the outer cuticle (in insects and other arthropods) called?
ecdysis

What steroid hormone controls molting in insects and other arthropods?
ecdysone

What is an echinoid?
sea urchin

What phylum of marine invertebrates that includes starfishes, sea urchins, brittlestars, crinoids, and sea cucumbers is characterized by fivefold radial symmetry, a calcareous skeleton, and tube feet operated by fluid pressure?
Echinodermata

What small phylum of wormlike marine invertebrates comprises the spoonworms?
Echiura

What nymph was deprived of speech by Hera to stop her chatter and left able only to repeat what others had said?
Echo

What is the meaningless repetition of words just spoken by another person as a symptom of a mental condition called?
echolalia

In what condition does one or more convulsions occur in a pregnant woman suffering from high blood pressure, often followed by a coma and posing a threat to the health of mother and baby?
eclampsia

What is a metamorphic rock containing granular minerals, typically garnet and pyroxene, called?
eclogite

What entomological verb means ``emerge as an adult from the pupa or as a larva from the egg''?
eclose

(1932--2016) What Italian novelist and semiotician wrote A theory of semiotics (1976), The name of the rose (1981), and Travels in hyperreality (1986)?
Umberto Eco

What is the gradual, continuous change in the species composition between two ecosystems or communities of organisms across an environmental gradient called?
ecocline

What word that means ``flayed'' in French refers to a painting or sculpture of a human figure with the skin removed to display the musculature?
écorché

In what energetic country dance in duple time---whose name comes from the French for ``Scottish''---do couples form lines facing each other?
ecossaise

What is the use of a detailed description of a work of visual art as a literary device?
ekphrasis

In what condition does the eyelid turn outward away from the eyeball, typically due to advanced age?
ectropion

What was the former official monetary unit of the European Union that was used to evaluate the exchange rates and reserves of members of the European Monetary System on a common basis and in trading Eurobonds?
ECU

(1901--74) What American television host and journalist gave national exposure to many performers who were on their way to stardom, including Elvis Presley and The Beatles?
Ed Sullivan

Define ``edacious.''
relating to or given to eating

What yellow pressed cheese of Dutch origin---whose name comes from that of a commune in the northwestern part of the Netherlands on the IJsselmeer north-northeast of Amsterdam---is usually made in flattened balls and often coated with red wax?
Edam

Name the dish of green soybeans boiled or steamed in their pods that means ``beans on a branch'' in Japanese.
edamame

``Therefore let us lie in wait for the righteous; because he is not for our turn, and he is clean contrary to our doings: he upbraideth us with our offending the law, and objecteth to our infamy the transgressings of our education. He professeth to have the knowledge of God: and he calleth himself the child of the Lord. He was made to reprove our thoughts. He is grievous unto us even to behold: for his life is not like other men's, his ways are of another fashion. We are esteemed of him as counterfeits: he abstaineth from our ways as from filthiness: he pronounceth the end of the just to be blessed, and maketh his boast that God is his father. Let us see if his words be true: and let us prove what shall happen in the end of him. For if the just man be the son of God, he will help him, and deliver him from the hand of his enemies. Let us examine him with despitefulness and torture, that we may know his meekness, and prove his patience. Let us condemn him with a shameful death: for by his own saying he shall be respected.'' What is this from?
Wisd. 2.12--20

What does Acts 4.11 say?
This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner.

Who, apparently, said, ``There are five fundamental operations of arithmetic: addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and modular forms''?
Martin Eichler

What name is given to either of two 13th-century Icelandic books, the Elder or Poetic [---] (a collection of Old Norse poems on Norse legends) and the Younger or Prose [---] (a handbook to Icelandic poetry by Snorri Sturluson), that are the chief source of knowledge of Scandinavian mythology?
Edda

(b. 1945) What Belgian racing cyclist won the Tour de France five times (1969--72 and 1974) in his professional career?
Eddy Merckx

What condition is characterized by an excess of watery fluid collecting in the cavities or tissues of the body?
edema

What order of mammals distinguished by the lack of incisor and canine teeth and native to Central and South America encompasses the anteaters, sloths, and armadillos?
Xenarthra

What is the other term for the order Xenarthra?
Edentata

(1809--49) What American short-story writer, poet, and critic --- whose fiction and poetry are Gothic in style and characterized by their exploration of the macabre and the grotesque --- wrote ``The fall of the House of Usher'' (1840), ``The murders in the Rue Morgue'' (1841), and ``The raven'' (1845)?
Edgar Allan Poe

(1869--1950) What American writer --- whose verse is collected most notably in the Spoon River anthology (1915) --- wrote biographies and novels?
Edgar Lee Masters

What Old English letter, ð or Ð, representing the dental fricatives /θ/ and /ð/, was superseded by the digraph th, but is now used as a phonetic symbol for the voiced dental fricative /ð/?
eth

Who revoked the Edict of Nantes?
Louis XIV

(1847--1931) What American inventor --- whose inventions include automatic telegraph systems, the carbon microphone for telephones, the phonograph, and the carbon filament lamp --- took out the first of more than 1,000 patents at the age of 21?
Thomas Edison

(1915--63) What French singer --- whose songs included ``La Vie en rose'' and ``Je ne regrette rien'' --- became known as a cabaret and music-hall singer in the late 1930s?
Edith Piaf

What Latin phrase refers to the first printed edition of a book?
editio princeps

(1656--1742) What English astronomer and mathematician is best known for identifying a bright comet (later named after him) and for successfully predicting its return?
Edmond Halley

(1868--1918) What French playwright and poet romanticized the life of the seventeenth-century soldier, duelist, and writer Cyrano de Bergerac in his poetic drama of that name (1897)?
Edmond Rostand

(1729--97) What British politician and man of letters wrote on the issues of political emancipation and moderation, notably with respect to Roman Catholics and the American colonies?
Edmund Burke

(1540--81) What English Jesuit priest and martyr's feast day is on 1 December?
St. Edmund Campion

(c. 1552--99) What English poet is best known for his allegorical romance The faerie queene (1590; 1596) that celebrated Queen Elizabeth I and was written in his eponymous stanza?
Edmund Spenser

(c. 841--870, feast day: 20 November) What king of East Anglia (855--870)---tradition holds---was captured and shot with arrows for refusing to reject the Christian faith or to share power with his pagan conqueror after the defeat of his army by the invading Danes in 870?
St. Edmund the Martyr

(c. 1175--1240, feast day: 16 November) What English churchman, teacher, and archbishop of Canterbury (1234--40) was the last primate of all of England?
St. Edmund

(1832--83) What French painter adopted a realist approach that greatly influenced the impressionists, using pure colour to give a direct unsentimental effect and noted for Déjeuner sur l'herbe (1863), Olympia (1865), and A bar at the Folies-Bergère (1882)?
Édouard Manet

(1868--1940) What French painter, graphic artist, and member of les nabis produced decorative panels, murals, paintings, and lithographs, particularly of domestic interiors and portraits?
Édouard Vuillard

What does ``EdP'' shorten?
eau de parfum

What does ``EdT'' shorten?
eau de toilette

What does ``EDTA'' abbreviate?
ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid

What crystalline acid with a strong tendency to form chelates with metal ions has the chemical formula (CH2COOH)2NCH2CH2N(CH2COOH)2?
EDTA

(1879--1973) What Luxembourgian-American photographer who is credited with transforming photography into an art form worked with Stieglitz in the early 1900s and was chief photographer for Vogue and Vanity Fair (1923--38) and, from 1947 to 1962, the director of photography for New York City's Museum of Modern Art?
Edward Steichen

(1928--2014) What Soviet statesman and head of state of Georgia (1995--2003) was minister of foreign affairs (1985--90) under Gorbachev before becoming head of state of his native Georgia?
Eduard Shevardnadze

Define ``educe.''
bring out or develop (something latent or potential)

Define ``edulcorate.''
make (something) more acceptable or palatable

(1843--1907) What Norwegian composer, conductor, and violinist is noted for his Piano Concerto in A minor (1869) and the incidental music to Henrik Ibsen's play Peer Gynt (1876)?
Edvard Grieg

(1863--1944) What Norwegian painter and engraver who infused his subjects with an intense emotionalism---exploring the use of vivid colour and linear distortion to express feelings about life and death---painted The scream (1893)?
Edvard Munch

(1737--94) What English historian is best known for his multi-volume work The history of the decline and fall of the Roman Empire (1776--88)?
Edward Gibbon

(1749--1823) What British physician --- the pioneer of vaccination --- deliberately infected people with small amounts of cowpox because he believed it would protect them from catching the disease, which led to the widespread use of vaccination against disease?
Edward Jenner

(1838--1923) What American chemist collaborated with Albert Michelson in 1887 in an experiment to determine the speed of light that disproved the existence of the ether?
Edward Williams Morley

(1800--82) What English theologian founded the Oxford Movement while professor of Hebrew at Oxford in 1833 and became its leader after the withdrawal of John Henry Newman in 1841?
Edward Bouverie Pusey

(1884--1939) What German-born American linguistics scholar, anthropologist, and founder of American structural linguistics carried out important research on North American Indian languages and linguistic theory?
Edward Sapir

What was Blackbeard's real name?
Edward Teach

(1908--2003) What Hungarian-American physicist worked on the first atomic reactor and the first atom bombs after moving to the United States? Work under his guidance led to the detonation of the first hydrogen bomb in 1952.
Edward Teller

(c. 1003--66, feast day: 13 October) What son of Ethelred the Unready and king of England (1042--66) founded Westminster Abbey, where he was eventually buried?
St. Edward the Confessor

(c. 870--924) The military successes of this son of Alfred the Great and king of Wessex (899--924) against the Danes made it possible for his son Athelstan to become the first king of all England in 925.
Edward the Elder

What lake on the Uganda--Democratic Republic of the Congo border is linked to Lake Albert by the Semliki River?
Lake Edward

What congenital condition arising from an extra copy of chromosome 18 is characterized by a distinctive appearance of the skull and face and impaired development of the brain and various organs, and typically fatal within the first two years of life?
Edwards's syndrome

``[T]he writer is the prey of an inner god who speaks at all times, without bothering, tyrant that he is, with the holidays of his medium. Writers are on holiday, but their Muse is awake, and gives birth non-stop.'' Who said this?
Barthes (Mythologies, ``The Writer on Holiday'')

Define ``loquacity.''
the quality or state of being very talkative

What word from the Greek ``word'' plus ``flow'' refers to excessive and often incoherent talkativeness or wordiness?
logorrhea

What is a writ issued by a superior court commanding the performance of a specified official act or duty?
mandamus

Where was Jacques Derrida born?
El Biar, Algeria

What word comes from the Persian (Avestan) for ``around'' plus ``a wall''?
paradise

For what proposed homeland of the Tamil people of Sri Lanka did the Tamil Tigers separatist group fight until their defeat in 2009?
Eelam

What nematode can become a serious pest of crops and ornamental plants?
eelworm

What most recent interglacial period of the Pleistocene in northern Europe preceded the Weichsel glaciation and corresponded to the Ipswichian in Britain?
Eem

What does ``EEPROM'' abbreviate?
electrically erasable programmable ROM

What form of massage involves a circular stroking movement made with the palm of the hand?
effleurage

What is the formation of a powdery deposit on the surface of brickwork, rock, or other material as a result of loss of moisture on exposure to air called?
efflorescence

Define ``effluvium.''
invisible emanation; by-product especially in the form of waste

Define ``efflux.''
the flowing out of a particular substance or particle

Define ``effulgent.''
radiant splendour

(d. 839) What king of Wessex (802--39) won a decisive victory that temporarily brought Mercian supremacy to an end and foreshadowed the superiority that Wessex later secured over all of England?
Egbert

What does ``EGF'' abbreviate?
epidermal growth factor

When was the epidermal growth factor first observed?
1959

For what is ``eglantine'' another term?
sweetbrier

What adjective describes a speech sound produced using the normal outward-flowing airstream?
egressive

How many dynasties ruled Ancient Egypt?
31

What mongoose (Herpestes ichneumon) is noted for its destruction of crocodile eggs?
Egyptian mongoose

(b. 1942) What Israeli Labour statesman was prime minister from 1999 to 2001?
Ehud Barak

(1906--62) What German Nazi administrator administered the concentration camps during World War II was traced to Argentina by Israeli agents and executed after going on trial in Israel in 1960?
Adolf Eichmann

What polyunsaturated fatty acid --- C19H29COOH --- found predominantly in fish oils is a metabolic precursor of prostaglandins in humans?
eicosapentaenoic acid

What Muslim festival marks the culmination of the annual pilgrimage to Mecca and commemorates the sacrifice of Abraham?
Eid al-Adha

What Muslim festival marks the end of the fast of Ramadan?
Eid al-Fitr

What northern sea duck has mainly black and white plumage with a coloured head (male) or has soft brown down feathers that are used to line the nest (female)?
eider

What was Eiffel's first name?
Gustave

Of what does the eightfold path consist?
right views, intention, speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, concentration

How long is an eightpenny nail in inches?
2.5

What southernmost town in Israel --- a port and resort at the head of the Gulf of Aqaba --- was founded in 1949 near the ruins of biblical Elath and is Israel's only outlet to the Red Sea?
Eilat

What is Einfühlung?
empathy

(1860--1927) What Dutch physiologist devised the first electrocardiograph?
Willem Einthoven

Who is the Greek goddess of peace?
Eirene

Who is the Roman equivalent of Eirene, the Greek goddess of peace?
Pax

Define ``irenic.''
favouring, conducive to, or operating toward peace, moderation, or conciliation

What part of Christian theology is concerned with reconciling different denominations and sects?
irenics

Where was Alfred Eisenstaedt born?
Dirschau

(1898--1948) What Latvian-born Russian movie director is noted for The battleship Potemkin (1925): a commemoration of the Russian Revolution of 1905 that is celebrated for its pioneering use of montage?
Sergei Eisenstein

Name the competitive festival of music and poetry held in Wales.
eisteddfod

What name is given to wine made from ripe grapes picked while covered with frost?
Eiswein

What does Matthew 18.3 say?
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

What name is given to a material that is forced or thrown out, especially as a result of volcanic eruption, meteoritic impact, or stellar explosion?
ejecta

What usually green film is formed naturally on copper and bronze by long exposure or artificially (as by acids) and often valued aesthetically for its colour?
patina

What typically voiceless consonants are pronounced with a sudden release of pressure from the glottis?
ejective

What was Krasnodar once called?
Yekaterinodar

What was Peter the Great's wife's name?
Yekaterina

What was Yekaterinburg once called?
Sverdlovsk

What Count of Bivar (c. 1043--99) and Spanish soldier --- immortalized in Poema del [---] (12th century) and Pierre Corneille's play (1637) --- captured Valencia from the Moors in 1094 and went on to rule it?
El Cid

What fictitious country or city abounding in gold was believed to exist somewhere in the region of the Orinoco and Amazon Rivers?
El Dorado

(1541--1614) What Cretan-born Spanish painter's portraits and religious works are characterized by distorted perspective, elongated figures, and strident use of colour?
El Greco

What site of ancient Thebes on the Nile contains the ruins of a temple built by Amenhotep III and monuments erected by Ramses II?
Luxor

What is el-Uqsur?
Luxor

(204--222) What Roman emperor (218--222) was notorious for his dissipated lifestyle and neglect of state affairs?
Heliogabalus

What ancient state in southwestern Iran was established in the fourth millennium BC? Susa was one of its chief cities.
Elam

What Cretaceous plesiosaur had a long neck shaped like that of a swan?
elasmosaur

On what river is Elâzığ, Turkey?
Euphrates

What river in central Europe flows for 1,159 km from the Czech Republic through the German cities of Dresden, Magdeburg, and Hamburg to the North Sea?
Elbe

What is the highest peak of the Elburz Mountains?
Damavand

What mountain range in northwestern Iran, close to the southern shore of the Caspian Sea, has its highest peak at Damavand?
Elburz Mountains

In what province is Elche located?
Alicante

(c. 1122--1204) What daughter of the duke of Aquitaine, queen of France (1137--52) and queen of England (1154--89) was the mother of Richard I and John I, was married to Louis VII of France from 1137 until their marriage was annulled in 1152, and married the future Henry II of England in 1154?
Eleanor of Aquitaine

In what ancient Greek city in southwestern Italy did a school of philosophers --- including Xenophanes, Parmenides, and Zeno --- flourish in the fifth century BC?
Elea

What property of certain dyes makes them change colour when placed in an electric field?
electrochromism

What chemical decomposition is produced by passing an electric current through a liquid or solution containing ions?
electrolysis

What is the recording of the electrical activity of muscle tissue, or its representation as a visual display or audible signal, using electrodes attached to the skin or inserted into the muscle called?
electromyography

What name is ascribed to each of a number of flattened plates of protoplasm that make up the electric organ of certain fish, like the electric eel?
electroplax

What natural or artificial alloy of gold with at least 20 percent silver was used for jewelry in ancient times?
electrum

What archaic name was given to a medicinal substance mixed with honey or another sweet substance?
electuary

Define ``eleemosynary.''
of, relating to, or supported by charity

What pair of lines consists of a dactylic hexameter and a pentameter, especially in Greek and Latin verse?
elegiac couplet

What quatrain in iambic pentameter is rhymed abab?
elegiac stanza

(b. 1960) What American Supreme Court associate justice was appointed by President Obama in 2010, previously served as his Solicitor General, and was the first woman to hold that post?
Elena Kagan

(1646--1684) What Venetian philosopher and mathematician---the first woman to be awarded a college degree---received a doctorate of philosophy from the University of Padua on 25 June 1678?
Elena Lucrezia Cornaro Piscopia

What is an elenchus?
logical refutation

What logical fallacy consists in apparently refuting an opponent while actually disproving something not asserted?
ignoratio elenchi

What was the Socratic method of eliciting truth by question and answer, mainly as used to refute an argument?
Socratic elenchus

In what condition does a limb or other part of the body become enlarged due to obstruction of the lymphatic vessels, typically by the nematode parasites that cause filariasis?
elephantiasis

What annual rites were performed by the ancient Greeks at a village near Athens in honour of Demeter and Persephone?
Eleusinian mysteries

What 160 km--long island in the central Bahamas was settled by the British in the 1640s?
Eleuthera

(1771--1834) Identify the French-born American industrialist whose gunpowder manufacturing plant near Wilmington, Delaware, established in 1802, grew into a corporate giant primarily due to the government contracts that ensured its early success, especially during the War of 1812.
E. I. du Pont

What was E. I. du Pont's full name?
Éleuthère Irénée du Pont

What is the movable part of the trailing edge of a delta wing called?
elevon

What German word for ``nightmare'' is the origin of the word ``elf''?
Alp

What literary plural noun refers to a tangled mass of hair?
elflocks

(b. 1946) What Austrian novelist, poet, and playwright who wrote Women as lovers (1975), Wonderful, wonderful times (1980), The piano teacher (1983), and Lust (1989) won the Nobel Prize for Literature (2004)?
Elfriede Jelinek

Executed by Phidias in the fifth century BC, these sculptures were brought from Greece between 1803 and 1812, when the country was under Turkish control. They are currently housed in the British Museum but are the subject of a repatriation request from the Greek government, which does not accept the legality of the Turkish sale. What collection of classical Greek marble sculptures and architectural fragments, chiefly from the Parthenon in Athens, was brought to England by the diplomat and art connoisseur Thomas Bruce (1766--1841), the 7th Earl of Elgin?
Elgin Marbles

What priest was a teacher to the prophet Samuel, for whom Samuel initially mistook God (1 Sam. 1--3)?
Eli

What pseudonym was adopted by Charles Lamb in his Essays of [---] (1823) and Last essays of [---] (1833)?
Elia

(1905--94) What Bulgarian-born British writer who wrote Auto-da-fé (1936) and Crowds and power (1960) won the Nobel Prize for Literature (1981)?
Elias Canetti

What American inventor patented the first sewing machine in 1846?
Elias Howe

Define ``elide.''
omit (a sound or syllable) when speaking

(1649--1721) What English colonial administrator was a significant benefactor of the Collegiate School in Saybrook, Connecticut, which was named --- College in his honour in 1718, after its move to New Haven?
Elihu Yale

What Hebrew prophet in the time of Jezebel maintained the worship of Jehovah against that of Baal and other pagan gods?
Elijah

(1888--1965) He is associated with the ride of literary modernism. Four Quartets (1943) revealed his increasing involvement with Christianity. He received the Nobel Prize for Literature (1948). What American-born British poet, critic, and playwright was established as the voice of a disillusioned generation by The waste land (1922)?
T. S. Eliot

What does ``ELISA'' abbreviate?
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay

What immunological assay technique makes use of an enzyme bonded to a particular antibody or antigen?
ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay)

(1926--2004) What Swiss-born American psychiatrist was a pioneer in the field of palliative care, revolutionized attitudes toward treatment of the terminally ill, and wrote On Death and Dying (1969)?
Elisabeth Kübler-Ross

(1915--2006) What German opera singer is mainly known for her recitals of German lieder and her roles in works such as Richard Strauss's Der Rosenkavalier?
Dame Elisabeth Schwarzkopf

(1755--1842) What French painter is known for her portraits of women and children, especially Marie Antoinette and Lady Hamilton?
Élisabeth Vigée-Lebrun

What was the name of Lubumbashi until 1966?
Elisabethville

(1821--1910) What English-born American physician was the first woman to receive a medical degree in the United States (1849) and the first woman listed in the Medical Register of the United Kingdom (1859)?
Elizabeth Blackwell

What type of sonnet used by Shakespeare is written in iambic pentameter and consists of three quatrains and a final couplet with the rhyme scheme abab cdcd efef gg?
Elizabethan sonnet

What range in south-central California, near Bakersfield, is the site of an oil reserve that was involved in the 1920s Teapot Dome scandal?
Elk Hills

What name is given to any of a Norwegian breed of hardy short-bodied medium-sized dogs with erect ears and a very heavy coat of gray hairs with black tips?
Norwegian elkhound

(1917--96) What American jazz singer --- known for her distinctive style of scat singing --- appeared with Count Basie and Duke Ellington and made a series of recordings of songs by George Gershwin and Cole Porter from the mid-1950s?
Ella Fitzgerald

What tetracyclic phenol extracted from oak galls and various fruits and nuts --- C14H6O8 --- has some ability to inhibit blood flow and retard the growth of cancer cells?
ellagic acid

What was Tuvalu's former name?
Ellice Islands

(1880--1951) What American explorer participated in a number of polar expeditions and was the first person to fly over both the North (1926) and South (1935) poles?
Lincoln Ellsworth

What is the density of the best sphere packing in 3 dimensions, conjectured by Kepler and proved by Hales?
\begin{align*}\frac{\pi}{\sqrt{18}}\end{align*}

What Ukrainian mathematician proved that the $E_8$ and Leech lattices give the densest sphere packings in $8$ and $24$ dimensions?
Maryna Viazovska

What is the 12th Bernoulli number?
$$-\frac{691}{2370}$$

Who has won the most Ballon d'ors?
Lionel Messi

What plateau region in Antarctica between the Walgreen Coast and Palmer Land rises at the Vinson Massif to 5,140 m, the highest point in Antarctica?
Ellsworth Land

(1925--2013) What American writer who is known for his gritty realism wrote Unknown man no. 89 (1977), Freaky deaky (1988), Get shorty (1990), and Road dogs (2009)?
Elmore Leonard

What is Elohim?
God

(1883--1963) What American columnist and professional hostess was a legendary hostess for high society and royalty from the 1920s and began to write a syndicated gossip column during the 1940s?
Elsa Maxwell

(1896--1973) What Italian-born French fashion designer collections were famous for unconventional and artistic themes like the human body, insects, or trompe-l'œil, and for using bright colours like her ``shocking pink''?
Elsa Schiaparelli

What is the Danish name for Elsinore?
Helsingør

What Pleistocene glaciation in northern Europe corresponds to the Anglian of Britain?
Elster

What twelfth month of the civil and sixth of the religious year coincides with parts of August and September?
Elul

Define ``elute.''
to remove (adsorbed material) from an adsorbent by means of a solvent

Define ``elutriate.''
to purify, separate, or remove by washing

What hard intrusive igneous rock is found in Cornwall, England, typically quartz porphyry?
elvan

Define ``elver.''
young eel, especially when undergoing mass migration upriver from the sea

What name is given to each of the two wing cases of a beetle?
elytron

What basic monetary unit of Swaziland is equal to 100 cents?
lilangeni

(1688--1772) The spiritual beliefs that this Swedish scientist, philosopher, and mystic expounded after a series of mystical experiences blended Christianity with pantheism and theosophy.
Emanuel Swedenborg

What name is given to any of a number of days reserved for fasting and prayer in the Western Christian Church that traditionally comprise the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday following St. Lucy's Day (13 December), the first Sunday in Lent, Pentecost (Whitsun), and Holy Cross Day (14 September), though other days are observed locally?
Ember Day

Who said, ``Be silent or let thy words be worth more than silence''?
Pythagoras

In Book 6 of an epic poem, what eponymous hero journeys from Lake Avernus to the underworld with the Cumaean Sibyl as his guide?
Aeneas

``We must leave exactly on time --- From now on, everything must function to perfection.'' Whose words were these, spoken to a station-master and quoted in 1939, part of the mythology that the trains always ran on time under Fascist dictatorships?
Mussolini

What village near Vienna is the site of the hunting lodge where the Habsburg crown prince Rudolf and his paramour Mary Vetsera committed suicide in mysterious circumstances in 1889?
Mayerling

What name is that of an Arian Christian Germanic people who maintained a North African kingdom in the 5th and 6th centuries and who, under their king Gaiseric, sacked Rome in 455?
Vandal

In cytogenetics, what term describes the entire chromosomal complement of a cell that may be observed during mitotic metaphase?
karyotype

``In the darkening twilight I saw a lone star hover gem-like above the bay.'' This was the last diary entry of what explorer, written on 5 January 1922 at Grytviken in South Georgia?
Ernest Shackleton

São Vicente, Boa Vista, and Santiago are among the islands of which republic? It gained its independence from Portugal in 1975, has a population of around half a million, and is situated approximately 600 kilometres from the coast of West Africa.
Cabo Verde

About whom is Graham Farmelo's The strangest man? In 1933, he shared the Nobel Prize for Physics with Erwin Schrödinger.
Paul Dirac

Often featuring in photographic illusions caused by forced perspective, what structure was begun in 1173 as the third and final structure of its city's cathedral complex? Designed to be 56 metres high, improvements to the foundations since 1990 have diminished its distinctive aberration.
Leaning Tower of Pisa

What specific location in New York City is named in the title of a 1999 work by the American author and critic Samuel Delany that critiques the politics of its transformation from a red light district to a tourist destination?
Times Square

What film of 1969 concerns the friendship between two hustlers in the Times Square area played by Dustin Hoffman and John Voight?
Midnight cowboy

By chance rather than etymology, what four-letter affirmation appears at the end of words meaning ``a round structure at the base of the forebrain,'' ``an opening or orifice in a human bone,'' ``a male organ in flowering plants,'' and ``quick-cooking egg noodles usually served in a broth with bits of meat and vegetables''?
amen

Name the play by Shakespeare that completes the title of the following: A 2003 paper by Louise Noble has the title, ```And make two pasties of your shameful heads': medicinal cannibalism and healing the body politic in [---].''
Titus Andronicus

Name the play by Shakespeare that completes the title of the following: A 1999 paper by G. A. Sullivan: ```Be this sweet Helen's knell, and now forget her': forgetting, memory, and identity in [---].''
All's well that ends well

Name the play by Shakespeare that completes the title of the following: A 1974 paper by Michael West: ``The folk background of Petruchio's wooing dance: male supremacy in [---].''
The taming of the shrew

What two chemical elements are the principal constituents of the alloys austenite, martensite, and pearlite?
carbon, iron

Mkhedruli is a script used to write what language?
Georgian

What three scripts are used to write Georgian?
Asomtavruli, Nuskhuri, Mkhedruli

Ca-lonh `round script' is a monosyllabic alphabet used to write what Sino-Tibetan language? This official language of a southeast Asian country has more than 30 million speakers.
Burmese

The alphabet of what Indo-European language was, according to tradition, invented by St. Mesrop Mashtots in the early fifth century?
Armenian

Name the character addressed by Dante in these lines of Inferno: «O donna di virtù, sola per cui / l'umana spezie eccede ogne contento / di quel ciel c'ha minor li cerchi sui[»] (Canto 2, 76--78).
Beatrice

Name the character addressed by Dante in these lines of Inferno: Ed ecco verso noi venir per nave / un vecchio, bianco per antico pelo, / gridando: «Guai a voi, anime prave! / Non isperate mai veder lo cielo: / i' vegno per menarvi a l'altra riva[»] (Canto 3, 82--86).
Charon the ferryman

Name the group of figures addressed by Dante in these lines of Inferno: [. . .] tre [---] infernal di sangue tinte, / che membra feminine avieno e atto, / e con idre verdissime eran cinte; / serpentelli e ceraste avien per crine, / onde le fiere tempie erano avvinte (Canto 9, 38--42).
Furies

Name the creature addressed by Dante in these lines of Inferno: [. . .] e `n su la punta de la rotta lacca / l'infamïa di Creti era distesa / che fu concetta ne la falsa vacca; / e quando vide noi, sé stesso morse, / sì come quei cui l'ira dentro fiacca (Canto 12, 38--42).
Minotaur

What is the largest city in the Chugoku region?
Hiroshima

John Conway is perhaps best known for his game of life, an example of what general kind of mathematical system?
cellular automata

What is tiling the plane called?
tesselation

What given name links these post-1970 authors: the Bradford-born playwright who wrote Rita, Sue and Bob too, the London-born author of Small island and fruit of the lemon, and the American radical feminist whose works include Letters from a warzone and Scapegoat?
Andrea

In Le plaisir du texte, Roland Barthes describes two ways of enjoying reading. He calls the first ``plaisir,'' defining it broadly as ``comfort reading.'' What word does he use for the pleasure derived from more challenging texts?
jouissance `bliss'

Defined by Léopold Senghor as ``the sum total of the values of the civilization of the black world,'' what term was both name and slogan for an anti-assimilationist movement among black francophone writers?
Négritude

What common French word did Jacques Derrida select to express the idea that the full meaning of any linguistic element is necessarily both relational and continuously deferred?
différance

From the Latin meaning ``thin sheet,'' what six-letter term denotes either a thin plate or scale, either of two broad, flat plates of bone of a vertebra that is fused with and extends from the pedicle to the median line of the neural arch to form the base of the spinous process and that along with the pedicle forms the posterior part of the vertebral foramen, the expanded part of a foliage leaf, or one of the narrow thin parallel plates of soft vascular sensitive tissue that cover the flesh within the wall of a hoof?
lamina

The SMC protein family consists of a number of ATPases involved in DNA packaging and repair. For what genetic entity does the ``C'' stand in SMC?
chromosome

What name is given to the complexes that include the SMC2 and SMC4 proteins and various kleisin and HEAT proteins? They play an integral role in the compaction of chromosomes in mitosis.
condensin

The SMC complex cohesin ensures the pairing of sister chromatids in mitosis. It is degraded by the APC at the onset of what phase of mitosis during which chromatids segregate into daughter cells?
anaphase

Influenced by impressionism, the Heidelberg School of artists was active in what country from the 1880s? Its leading figures included Frederick McCubbin and Tom Roberts, painters respectively of The pioneer and Shearing the rams?
Australia

A key enzyme of the vertebrate's digestive system, what protease was first isolated by Wilhelm Kühne in 1876, who gave it a name from the Greek for ``to rub''? It is an essential reagent in cell culture and for the digestion of proteins prior to mass spectrometry.
trypsin

Used as a pretext for Japan to invade northeastern China, the Manchurian incident of 1931 took place at what present-day Chinese provincial capital?
Shenyang

The Xi'an incident of 1936 saw the seizure of what nationalist leader by his own generals in an attempt to force him to make a united front with Mao's communists?
Chiang Kai-shek

The Marco Polo bridge incident of 1937 --- an armed clash that escalated into the Sino-Japanese War --- took place southwest of what major city?
Beijing

Described as an anarchist masterpiece, Enquiry concerning political justice is a work of 1793 by whom? Four years later, he married a prominent feminist author and, in 1818, published Letters of advice to a young American.
William Godwin

Including a 4--0 win over Ethiopia in the inaugural tournament of 1957 and three consecutive titles this century, what team has been the most successful in football's Africa Cup of Nations?
Egypt

The River Waveney marks much of the boundary between what two English counties, meeting the North Sea not far from the easternmost point of Great Britain?
Norfolk, Suffolk

What specific eight-letter term denotes a Latin verb that is active in meaning but passive in appearance (one whose principal parts are all passive)?
deponent

What common two-word Latin phrase that involves a deponent verb means ``an abrupt change in topic'' or ``a response that does not follow from the previous statement''?
non sequitur

Involving a deponent Laitn verb, what two-word Latin phrase means ``a reminder of death or mortality''?
momento mori

Described as the guiding genius behind the Soviet spaceflight program, what Ukrainian engineer gives his name to an ice-filled, 80 km crater in the northern polar region of Mars?
Sergei Korolev

What is Albania if Serbia and Switzerland are both beryllium and Finland is helium in the context of the names of their capital cities?
titanium

Buvinda on Ptolemy's map is identified as what river that rises in County Kildare and meets the Irish Sea near Drogheda?
Boyne

On Ptolemy's map, Logia corresponds to the River Lagan that joins the sea at a loch named after what city?
Belfast

On Ptolemy's map, Senos is thought to be what long river that flows into the Atlantic to the west of Limerick?
Shannon

What name is given to the coating of basic cupric carbonate that forms a green deposit on copper on exposure to the atmosphere?
verdigris

Who wrote the 1953 book Junkie under the pseudonym William Lee, a name he also used for a character in his later novel The naked lunch?
William S. Burroughs

What term is given to the wearing away of material from the surface of an object travelling at high speed through a planetary atmosphere, as if it is only a vowel from a word meaning ``washing''?
ablation

Identify the word: ``Transport by bulk motion, usually used of transport perpendicular to the direction of gravity.''
advection

What name was given by Ptolemy on his map to the settlement at present-day Dublin?
Eblana

What is Limnos on Ptolemy's map? It is the largest island off the east coast of Ireland.
Lambay Island

In what French seaport was Roland Barthes born?
Cherbourg

What does John 1.5 say?
And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not.

Who received the first prize in the senior division of the Menuhin Competition in 2021?
María Dueñas

Where was Hilary Hahn born?
Lexington

What Italian senatori a vita was elected Chefdirigent of the Berliner Philharmoniker in 1989?
Claudio Abbado

What South Korean go legend played a televised five-game match against AlphaGo? AlphaGo won 4--1.
Lee Sedol

Against what world number one did AlphaGo play in a three-game match at the Future of Go Summit in Wuzhen in May 2017?
Ke Jie

What is the Chinese word for the board game go?
圍棋 [wéi qí]

Where did Claude Monet die?
Giverny

Where was Pablo Picasso born?
Málaga

In what year was Chloe Chua born?
2007

Where was Gustavo Dudamel born?
Barquisimeto, Venezuela

In what year did Chaucer die?
1400

Where was Olivier Messaien born?
Avignon

What book of organ pieces by J. S. Bach took existing chorales and elaborated on them?
Das Orgelbüchlein `Little Organ Book'

Where was Jean-Pierre Serre born?
Bages, Pyrénées-Orientales

Where was Alexander Grothendieck born?
Berlin

Where was the mathematician John Tate born?
Minneapolis

Where did Alexander Grothendieck die?
Saint-Lizier

Where did Hermann Weyl decease?
Zürich

What mathematics expositor runs 3Blue1Brown on YouTube?
Grant Sanderson

Where was Manjul Bhargava born?
Hamilton, Ontario

Where was Jacob Collier born?
London

Who proved Kepler's conjecture on three-dimensional sphere packing?
Thomas Hales

Where was Elon Musk born?
Pretoria

About whom was Legendre speaking when he exclaimed, ``Quelle tête celle du jeune Norvégien!'' `What a head the young Norwegian has!'?
Abel

Where was Richard Borcherds born?
Cape Town

Who resolved monstrous moonshine?
Richard Borcherds

Where was Ray Chen born?
Taipei

Where was Maxim Vengerov born?
Novosibirsk

In what village did Sidney Crosby and Nathan MacKinnon grow up?
Cole Harbour

Where was Joe Rogan born?
Newark

What small order of insects comprises the web-spinners?
Embioptera

What jural noun is given to the profit from growing crops that have been sown, regarded as personal property?
emblements

What name is given to a blood clot, air bubble, piece of fatty deposit, or other object that has been carried in the bloodstream to lodge in a vessel?
embolus

What name for the plumpness of a person comes from the French for ``in good condition''?
embonpoint

What postpositive heraldic adjective describes an arm bent at the elbow or a dolphin with the body curved?
embowed

Define ``embrasure.''
opening with sides flaring outward in a wall or parapet of a fortification usually for allowing the firing of cannon

Define ``imbrue.''
stain

Define ``emend.''
make textual corrections

(1803--82) What American philosopher and poet became associated with German idealism in 1832 on a visit to Berlin? On his return to the US, he evolved the concept of transcendentalism, which found expression in his essay ``Nature'' (1836).
Ralph Waldo Emerson

What grayish-black mixture of corundum and magnetite is used in powdered form as an abrasive?
emery

What is the technical term for the action or process of vomiting?
emesis

What alkaloid that is present in ipecac was formerly used in the treatment of amoebic infections and as an emetic in aversion therapy?
emetine

What island is Estonia's largest?
Saaremaa

What kind of hard Swiss cheese with many holes in it is similar to Gruyère?
Emmental

What is the Roman name for Ljubljana?
Emona

Define ``emolument.''
salary, fee, or profit from employment or office

What Spanish or Latin American pastry turnover is filled with a variety of savoury ingredients and baked or fried?
empanada

(c. 493--c. 433 BC) What Greek philosopher born in Sicily taught that the universe is composed of fire, air, water, and earth, which mingle and separate under the influence of the opposing principles of Love and Strife?
Empedocles

Define ``empennage.''
arrangement of stabilizing surfaces at the tail of an aircraft

(1102--67) What English princess, daughter of Henry I and mother of Henry II, was known as Empress Maud? Henry's only legitimate child, she was named his heir, but her cousin Stephen seized the throne on Henry's death in 1135. She waged an unsuccessful civil war against Stephen until 1148.
Matilda

As what is Rub' al-Khali also known?
Empty Quarter

What animal is Dromaius novaehollandiae?
emu

Translate ``Kejserens nye klæder.''
The emperor's new clothes

What five-letter word begins expressions with these meanings: ``a statistical measure of student enrollment in education'' and ``a standard measure of the value of goods and services produced in a country during a certain period''?
gross

Identify the modern-day country of the Americas whose territory was the target of the ill-fated seventeenth-century colonization project known as the Darien scheme.
Panama

What term coined in 1791 by the Irish-born artist Robert Barker describes his large landscape paintings intended to be exhibited in 360 degrees on a cylindrical wall?
panorama

What are scaly anteaters?
pangolins

With fewer than 30 copies still known to exist, the Dunlap broadsides are contemporaneously printed versions of what historical document?
Declaration of Independence

What planetary satellite has a distinctive network of dark cracks across its otherwise bright surface?
Europa

Plato's dialogue Timaeus assigns elements to four of the five platonic solids except for which one that has the Schläfli symbol 5,3?
dodecahedron

In his Mysterium cosmographicum, Kepler fitted platonic solids between the orbits of the known planets. Which two were separated by the dodecahedron?
Earth, Mars

How many direct symmetries does a regular dodecahedron have?
60

What attribute is said to be granted by the cap or helmet of the Greek god Hades?
invisibility

Meaning ``compartment'' or ``division,'' what short German term is used for a system of voice classification used to distinguish operatic roles?
Fach

What term is used in the Fach system for an elaborate soprano role characterized by trills and cadenzas? A notable example occurs in the so-called ``mad scene'' of Donizetti's Lucia di lammermoor.
coloratura

First played by Mozart's sister-in-law Josepha Hofer, what coloratura soprano role in The magic flute sings the aria known as ``the revenge of hell''?
Queen of the Night

Of the seven letters used in Roman numerals, three appear consecutively on a standard QWERTY keyboard. Taken in order, what decimal number does this combination represent?
95

What island is a leading producer of vanilla and sapphire?
Madagascar

Who was Dian Fossey?
zoologist

In 1967, Dian Fossey established the Karisoke Research Centre for the study of gorillas in the Virunga Mountains region of what country?
Rwanda

What chain of volcanoes is on the northern border of Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Uganda?
Virunga

What is the peak of the Virunga mountains?
Karisimbi

Born in Kenya in 1903, what anthropologist was an early mentor of Dian Fossey and Biruté Galdikas?
Louis Leakey

Following Dian Fossey's murder in 1905, the conservation fund she had founded was renamed in her honour. What actress became its honorary chair in 1988?
Sigourney Weaver

Who discovered, described, and named Australopithecus?
Raymond Dart

Where was Pierre Deligne born?
Etterbeek, Belgium

Where was Mikhael Gromov born?
Boksitogorsk

What mathematician advised Denis Auroux?
Mikhael Gromov

Charlotte, Countess of Yarmouth, Charles Lennox, Duke of Richmond, and James Scott, Duke of Monmouth were among the illegitimate children of what British monarch?
Charles II

From an Italian Renaissance family, what name is given in topology to a system of three loops connected so that cutting any one loop leaves the other two unlinked?
Borromean links

Similar in idea to a Borromean linkage, a system of subatomic particles in which a group of three is stable but a pair is not is named after what Soviet theoretician?
Efimov

Observed in red giant stars, the triple-alpha process features what specific isotope as a short-lived intermediary state?
beryllium-8

Sciagraphy is a branch of the science of perspective that deals with the projection of what? In less-common usage, the term may also refer to the science of radiography and to the making of sundials?
shadows

The white boy shuffle and The sellout are works by whom?
Paul Beatty

Identify the city nicknamed ``the Pink City'' after its ruler ordered buildings to be repainted pink, the colour of hospitality, before a visit by the Prince of Wales in 1876.
Jaipur

What is the capital of Rajasthan?
Jaipur

Distinguished by its yellow sandstone architecture, identify the city known as the ``Golden City'' that is dominated by a medieval fort noted for its appearance when viewed at sunrise and sunset.
Jaisalmer

Nicknamed the ``Blue City'' after the buildings in its old quarters, what city is situated on the edge of the Thar Desert?
Jodhpur

What desert region to the east of the Indus River lies in Rajasthan and Gujarat?
Thar

Also known as ``reduction division,'' what is the term for nuclear division during the formation of gametes?
meiosis

Identify the regnal name shared by the following popes: the second, who gave his blessing to the Norman Conquest of England, and the fourth, the father of Lucrezia Borgia.
Alexander

Identify the regnal name shared by the following popes: the third, who decreed the second and final excommunication of Henry VIII, and the sixth, who concluded the Second Vatican Council in 1965.
Paul

Identify the regnal name shared by the following popes: the eighth, who put Galileo on trial, and the second, who launched the first crusade.
Urban

What present-day European country suffered three partitions in the later eighteenth century?
Poland

What eighth-century forgery claimed to be a historical document transferring control of the western Roman Empire to the papacy under Sylvester I?
Donation of Constantine

For a three-dimensional wave function in quantum mechanics, what quantity is obtained using the operator $-i \hbar \nabla$?
linear momentum

What branch of literary theory was developed principally by Stephen Greenblatt in the 1980s?
new historicism

What English name is usually given to the realist art movement, associated with Otto Dix and George Grosz, that emerged in Germany in the 1920s as a reaction against expressionism?
new objectivity

In 1689, which two empires signed the Treaty of Nerchinsk?
Russian Empire, Qing Empire

NINE TENSES is an anagram of the name of what transuranic element?
Tennessine

UMBER LIKE is an anagram of what transuranic element named after a city in California?
Berkelium

MINUTE PUN is an anagram of the name of what actinide metal with the atomic number 93?
Neptunium

What surname is shared by two contemporaneous American composers, one of whom wrote the score for the film The magnificent seven and the other the music for West side story?
Bernstein

Distinguished by large cheek pouches, what Old World primate genus includes the snow monkey of Japan, the Barbary ape, and the rhesus monkey?
Macaca

A centre of cheesemaking, what town near Cardiff is home to Britain's largest castle after Windsor?
Caerphilly

Meaning ``fortress'' or ``stronghold,'' ``Caer'' is the Welsh name of what English city that was a former Roman legionary base?
Chester

The legionary fortress of Caerleon is situated on the River Usk, a few miles from what Welsh city?
Newport

Of the elements in the p-block of the periodic table, which has the lowest atomic number?
boron

Still life with apples and Basket of apples are works by what artist, born in Provence in 1839?
Cezanne

Which artist's painting, Swallows the poisoned apple, depicts Walt Disney's Snow white as a middle-aged woman clutching her throat in agony? The work is a response to the 1937 Disney film.
Paula Rego

Magritte's 1964 painting, The son of man, depicts a besuited man whose features are obscured by an apple. What headgear was he wearing?
bowler hat

Described in Acts, the riot of the silversmiths took place in what ancient city, later the site of the Library of Celsus? The dispute was led by makers of miniature shrines to Artemis.
Ephesus

Who was the Neapolitan ``King of Tenors''?
Enrico Caruso

Who developed the oral polio vaccine?
Albert Sabin

What proto-computer programmer was the daughter of Lord Byron?
Ada Lovelace

The blind king dies in Sophocles's him ``at Colonus.''
Oedipus

What Italian American became synonymous with get-rich-quick scams?
Charles Ponzi

What layer of the atmosphere contains the ozone layer?
stratosphere

Huck Finn rafts the river not with Tom, but with whom?
Jim

What is Japanese horseradish?
wasabi

Identify the Shakespeare play: the king of Naples is shipwrecked by a sorcerer.
The tempest

What river separates Cambridge and Boston?
Charles River

Who made ``No sleep till Brooklyn''?
Beastie Boys

Who wrote ``Sonnets from the Portuguese''?
Elizabeth Barret Browning

What creature symbolizes Athena, the goddess of wisdom?
owl

Complete the phrase: ``The lady doth protest too much, [---].''
methinks (Hamlet 3.2.226)

The Battle of Vítkov Hill (1420) and the Battle of White Mountain (1620) took place near what present-day capital?
Prague

What large pan-Indian empire did Chandragupta found shortly after the death of Alexander the Great?
Mauryan Dynasty

Chandragupta's palace was at Pataliputra on the Ganges. What present-day Indian state capital occupies the site?
Patna

Who was the third ruler of the Maurya Empire?
Ashoka

Formerly part of the Khanate of Kokand, Namangan in the northern Fergana Valley is a major city in what country?
Uzbekistan

Using atomic numbers, if argon minus neon is oxygen, what element is calcium minus fluorine?
sodium

The Norwegian red king crab is found to the north of Russia in what area of the Arctic Ocean, also called the ``Murman Sea''?
Barents Sea

What five-letter word links the largest lake in Italy with a national law enforcement body?
Garda

What is the largest lake in Italy?
Garda

Formed by Napoleon in 1806, the Grand Duchy of Berg had as its capital what city on the Rhine a little downstream of Cologne?
Düsseldorf

Name four cities that are nicknamed ``the city of roses.''
Portland, Shiraz, Guadalajara, Bloemfontein

When was the Stanley Cup first awarded?
1893

Of England's Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, what is the largest, including within its boundaries Bredon Hill, T. S. Eliot's Burnt Norton, and the source of the River Thames?
Cotswolds

With a name taken from a west African language, what severe form of protein-energy malnutrition is characterized by stunted growth, edema, and abnormal patches of skin pigmentation?
kwashiorkor

Connect these words: Fox, Andreanof, Rat, Near, Commander.
Aleutian Islands

What market town between Coventry and Oxford gives its name to the procedure in cryptoanalysis developed by Alan Turing to help decipher the Enigma encoding?
Banbury

Where did Turing et al. decipher the Enigma encoding?
Bletchley Park

The Greek for ``wanderer'' is the origin of what word?
planet

Adjacent to barium in the periodic table and discovered in 1839, what element has a name derived from the Greek for ``lie hidden''?
lanthanum

What lanthanide's name means ``hard to get''?
dysprosium

What group 18 element has a name that comes from the Greek for ``stranger''?
xenon

Born in 1883, what American geologist gives his name to a major glacier in west Antarctica, the significance of which in terms of global sea level rises means it is called ``the doomsday glacier''?
Fredrik T. Thwaites

Who popularized modern American English spelling?
Noah Webster

What technique of altering the standard tuning of a stringed instrument to produce particular effects did Paganini employ in his first violin concerto that is meant to be played in E flat major but written in D major for the solo violin?
scordatura

Who first translated the New Testament into Finnish?
Mikael Agricola

Who wrote the Kalevala?
Elias Lönnrot

What is a Banach space?
complete normed vector space

Who proved Ramanujan's conjecture that $\tau(p)$ is bounded by $2p^{11/2}$ and Petersson's conjecture that, if $c(n)$ defines the $n$th Fourier coefficient of a modular function of weight $k$, then $c(p)$ is bounded by $2p^{(k-1)/2}$ in his masterful proof of the Riemann hypothesis for curves over finite fields?
Deligne

Who introduced the theory of schemes in 1960?
Grothendieck

On what date did Puccini's Madama butterfly premiere?
17 February 1904

Thought to be among the first to domesticate the horse, the Botai culture flourished in the fourth millennium BC. Its archaeological sites are located near the Ishim River in what central Asian country?
Kazakhstan

What name is shared between the class of angels closest to man and a Kazakh river?
Ishim

What is the highest rank of angels in Judaism?
Chayot Hakodesh

In the book The horse, the wheel, and language, the anthropologist David W. Anthony argues that the domestication of the horse by the Botai played a vital role in the spreading of what widespread language family?
Indo-European

Previously thought to be the only extant wild horse, what horse taxon was genetically determined to be a descendant of the Botai horses, suggesting it is a feral population of a once-domesticated animal?
Przewalski's horse

In Christian monasticism, what six-letter word denotes those who, while not being professed as monk or nun, have dedicated themselves to service in connection with the religious order? The word also means something in geometry.
oblate

Used as a proxy for intelligence, what measurement of relative brain size is considered more accurate than a simple brain-to--body mass ratio, taking into account allometric effects? It is often abbreviated as EQ.
encephalization quotient

Encephalization quotient values are normalized to an average species such that values above one are considered large-brained. What domesticated animal traditionally has EQ one?
cat

What species has the largest encephalization quotient after humans?
dolphin

Based on James Joyce's acquaintance, Oliver St. John Gogarty, what fictional character is a young medical student as well as a friend and roommate of Stephen Dedalus?
Buck Mulligan

``I think my sculptures are about what a human being or an animal feels like, not what they necessarily look like.'' These are the words of what twentieth-century sculptor whose works include Horse and rider and Goggle head?
Elisabeth Frink

What single word completes the phrase coined by the critic Herbert Reed to describe the work of sculptors including Bernard Meadows, whose use of spindly and angular forms influenced Elisabeth Frink's early work? ``The geometry of [---].''
fear

Elisabeth Frink's War horse and Walking madonna may be seen in the gardens of what stately home in Derbyshire?
Chatsworth

To the nearest 100, what is the sum total of the number of Psalms in the King James Bible, the number of Shakespeare's sonnets in the 1609 quarter, and the number of tales in Boccaccio's Decameron?
400

What surname is concatenated with ``random'' to give an alternative title for Chess960?
Fischer

Containing frescos by Goya, the Cathedral of the Virgin of the Pillar is located in what city on the River Ebro? Named after the Roman Emperor Caesar Augustus, it is the capital of the Spanish region of Aragon.
Zaragoza

On what river is Zaragoza located?
Ebro

What is the capital of Aragon?
Zaragoza

Where was Sir Simon Rattle born?
Liverpool

What hornist who was born in Münster was named principal horn of the Berliner Philharmoniker in 1993?
Stefan Dohr

What German Solo-Oboe of the Berliner Philharmoniker began his professional career in 1990 as Solo-Oboe of the Bamberg Symphony Orchestra?
Albrecht Mayer

What instrument does Sarah Willis play?
horn

What Solo-Fagott of the Berliner Philharmoniker was a student of Alfred Rinderspacher and studied with Klaus Thunemann at the Hanover University of Music, Drama, and Media? He became a member of the Berliner Philharmoniker on 1 September 1985.
Stefan Schweigert

Where was trumpeter Velenczei Tamás of the Berliner Philharmoniker born?
Esztergom

Where was Ludwig Quandt, Solocellist of the Berliner Philharmoniker, born?
Ulm

Kate Croy, Milly Theale, and the journalist Merton Densher are significant characters in what novel by Henry James?
The wings of the dove

What name is given to the determinant of the matrix of the first $n-1$ derivatives of a collection of $n$ single-variable functions?
Wrońskian

Meaning ``small box,'' what three-letter word appears in the name of an annual judicial procedure or trial conducted by Goldsmith's?
pyx

Meaning ``to separate the grain from the chaff,'' what word does Keats use to describe the wind in the second stanza of ``To autumn''?
winnowing

Meaning ``miserable in appearance,'' what word appears in the same line as ``haggard'' in Keats's ``La belle dame sans merci''?
woe-begone

What common adjective is applied to the word ``South'' in Keats's ``Ode to a nightingale''?
warm

A common timber tree, what member of the pine family may be identified in winter by its small oval cones that remain on the tree and by the loss of its needle-like leaves?
European larch

Succeeding Sargon II, who became king of Assyria in 705 BC? He is chiefly remembered for a failed siege of Jerusalem described by Bryon in a poem that begins, ``The Assyrian came down like a wolf on the fold.''
Sennacherib

The dinosaur classifications Saurischia and Ornithischia are so-called because of the resemblance of what skeletal joint to those of modern lizards and birds, respectively?
hip

Also known as the ``reptile bird,'' what bird of the South American swamplands is noted for the winged claws of its young that resemble those of the archaeopteryx dinosaurs?
hoatzin

Alive in the Cretaceous period and growing to a height of around eight feet, the dinosaur Struthiomimus was so-named because of its superficial resemblance to what large bird?
ostrich

What surname is shared by the two astrophysicists who, alongside Willie Fowler and Fred Hoyle, wrote the landmark 1957 paper ``Synthesis of the elements in stars,'' also known as the ``$\textrm{B}^{\textrm{2FH}}$ paper''?
Burbidge

In its ancient era, what country was divided into administrative regions called ``nomes''?
Egypt

Although initially performed by a castrato, Orfeo has often become a woman's role in a 1762 opera by what German composer?
Gluck

Count Octavian, the youthful lover of an older princess, is the travesti role in which opera by Richard Strauss?
Der rosenkavalier

In what opera by Mozart is the trouser role character Cherubino sent away to join the army for flirting with female members of Count Almaviva's household?
The marriage of Figaro

Who indited Six characters in search of an author?
Pirandello

What Theatre of the absurd play did Ionesco write to oppose Sartre?
Rhinoceros

What four-letter word is formed by concatenating the second letters of the chemical symbols of lead, gold, tin, and silver?
bung

In the process of Big Bang nucleosynthesis, fusion reactions during the first few minutes of the new universe built up specific light nuclei, including what stable isotope with atomic mass 3?
helium-3

What specific isotope was the heaviest to be produced in detectable quantities during Big Bang nucleosynthesis, accounting for about one in ten billion primordial nuclei?
lithium-7

What isotope is the lightest to be generated in Big Bang nucleosynthesis because it is rapidly burned in stars? The cosmic abundance of this isotope has decreased since the Big Bang.
deuterium

In what Shakespearean tragedy does Iago say, ``Trifles light as air / Are to the jealous confirmations strong as proofs of holy writ''?
Othello (3.3.322--24)

The saffron revolution (2007) involved anti-government protests led by Buddhist monks wearing saffron-coloured robes. In what country did it occur?
Myanmar

Coloured signs carried by demonstrators gave Kuwait's 2005 blue revolution its name. The aim was not to overthrow the government but to achieve what end?
women's suffrage

Soldiers were given flowers by protesters demanding the resignation of what president during the 2003 rose revolution in the former Soviet state of Georgia?
Eduard Shevardnadze

What country comes fourth in this clockwise sequence of countries bordering Slovakia: Poland, Ukraine, Hungary, [---]?
Austria

The dream and La female garde are creations of what director and founding choreographer of the Royal Ballet?
Frederick Ashton

What contemporary composer created the score to Woolf works: a ballet that was inspired by Virginia Woolf?
Max Richter

Zero degrees, Fall, and Exhibition are among the creations of what Belgian-born director and choreographer?
Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui

What name is given to the endomorphism that sends an element to its $p$th power, which is an automorphism if $F$ is a finite field of characteristic $p$?
Frobenius

What name's given to an ulcer or eruption occurring on a mucus-secreting surface such as the inside of the mouth?
enanthema

What is the physiological term --- one of the somatypes --- for someone with a lean and delicate body build?
ectomorph

What is the tendency of things to change into their opposites, especially as a supposed governing principle of natural cycles and of psychological development?
enantiodromia

What dark gray mineral consists of a sulphide of copper and arsenic?
enargite

What's a ball-and-socket joint called?
enarthrosis

What is enation?
outgrowth from the surface of a leaf or other part of a plant

Who discovered Enceladus?
Herschel

What name is given to two naturally occurring compounds in the brain---peptides related to the endorphins with similar physiological effects---that regulate nociception?
enkephalin

What is the inflammation of the brain and spinal cord typically due to acute viral infection?
encephalomyelitis

What term in ballet describes a linked sequence of steps or movements constituting a phrase?
enchaînement

What is an enchilada?
rolled tortilla with a filling typically of meat and served with a chili sauce

Define ``enchiridion.''
book containing essential information on a subject

What linguistic term refers to a word pronounced with so little emphasis that it is shortened and forms part of the preceding word, like ``n't'' in ``can't''?
enclitic

Define ``encomium.''
speech or piece of writing that praises someone or something highly

What grant was given by the Spanish Crown to a colonist in America, conferring the right to demand tribute and forced labour from the Indian inhabitants of an area?
encomienda

Define ``frabjous.''
delightful; joyous

What's a papal letter sent to all bishops of the Roman Catholic Church called?
encyclical

What Irish Fine Gael statesman was Taoiseach from 2011 to 2017?
Enda Kenny

What part of Antarctica claimed by Australia was named by its discoverer, English navigator John Biscoe, after the London whaling firm where he was employed?
Enderby Land

Define ``endergonic.''
(of a metabolic/chemical process) accompanied by or requiring the absorption of energy, the products being of greater free energy than the reactants

Define ``exergonic.''
(of a metabolic/chemical process) accompanied by the release of energy

(1897--1985) What American virologist devised a method of growing viruses in tissue cultures with Frederick C. Robbins (1916--2003) and Thomas H. Weller (1915--2008), which led to the development of vaccines against mumps, polio, and measles? He won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1954) with Robbins and Weller.
John Franklin Enders

What computing adjective describes two systems of ordering data, in which the most significant unit is put either first or last? Its name comes from the egg-breaking habits of characters from Swift's Gulliver's travels.
endian

What innermost layer of the pericarp surrounding a fruit seed may be membranous (as in apples) or woody (as in the stone of a peach or cherry)?
endocarp

What adjective is used to describe something situated or occurring within cartilage?
endochondral

What is the taking in of matter by a living cell by invagination of its membrane to form a vacuole?
endocytosis

What is the innermost layer of cells or tissue of an embryo in early development, or the parts derived from this, which include the lining of the gut and associated structures?
endoderm

What branch of dentistry is concerned with diseases and injuries of the soft tissues inside a tooth?
endodontics

What mucous membrane lining the uterus thickens during the menstrual cycle in preparation for possible implantation of an embryo?
endometrium

What enzyme cleaves a polynucleotide chain by separating nucleotides other than the two end ones?
endonuclease

What is the set of relationships among words having the same reference within a text, contributing to textual cohesion: anaphora and cataphora?
endophora

What tissue forms a single layer of cells lining various organs and cavities of the body, especially the blood vessels, heart, and lymphatic vessels, and is formed from the embryonic mesoderm?
endothelium

What toxic insecticide and stereoisomer of dieldrin has the chemical formula C12H8Cl6O?
endrin

Define ``endue.''
endow or provide with a quality or ability

What remarkably beautiful young man of Greek mythos was loved by the Moon (Selene)? According to one story, he was put in an eternal sleep by Zeus for having fallen in love with Hera, and was then visited every night by Selene.
Endymion

Define ``enervate.''
cause (someone) to feel drained of energy or vitality; weaken

What uninhabited island in the North Pacific Ocean, one of the Marshall Islands, was used by the United States as a testing ground for atom bombs (1948--54) after its population was evacuated?
Eniwetok

Define ``enfetter.''
restrain (someone) as if with shackles

What volatile organic liquid and halogenated ether that is used as a general anesthetic has the chemical formula CHF2OCF2CHFCl?
enflurane

(1854--1921) What German composer wrote the opera Hänsel und Gretel (1893)?
Engelbert Humperdinck

Define ``engirdle.''
surround; encircle

In what key is the English horn written?
F

What part of Ireland over which England exercised jurisdiction before the whole country was conquered varied in extent at different times from the reign of Henry II until the complete conquest under Elizabeth I but was centred in Dublin?
English Pale

Define ``englobe.''
enclose in or shape into a globe

Define ``engorge.''
cause to swell with blood, water, or another fluid

Define ``engram.''
hypothetical change in neural tissue postulated in order to account for persistence of memory

What is the continuation of a sentence without a pause beyond the end of a line, couplet, or stanza?
enjambment

Define ``ennead.''
set of nine

What nine-sided figure is used in a particular system of analysis to represent the spectrum of possible personality types?
enneagram

(239--169 BC) What Roman epic poet and playwright was largely responsible for the creation of a native Roman literature based on Greek models?
Quintus Ennius

Who was the eldest son of Cain?
Enoch

What was the first city that was built by Cain and named after his eldest son?
Enoch

What is the study of wines?
enology

What is an oenophile?
connoisseur of wines

What name is given to the political union of Cyprus and Greece as an aim or ideal of certain Greeks and Cypriots?
enosis

What Majorcan spiral-shaped pastry is made with sweet yeast dough and topped with powdered sugar?
ensaimada

For what is ``ensiform cartilage'' another term?
xiphoid process

(1860--1949) The work of what Belgian painter and engraver of macabre subjects is significant for both symbolism and the development of 20th-century expressionism?
James Ensor

Define ``ensorcell.''
enchant; fascinate

What translucent crystalline mineral of varying colours that occurs in some igneous rocks and stony meteorites consists of magnesium silicate and is a member of the pyroxene group?
enstatite

Define ``enswathe.''
envelop or wrap in a garment or piece of fabric

What name is given to a set of points containing a unit line segment in every direction?
Kakeya set

Through what years did the Jagiellonian dynasty exist?
1386--1569

The reign of what two kings marked the Polish Golden Age?
Sigismund I, Sigismund II

Under what German law system were cities founded in the Jagiellonian dynasty?
Magdeburg law

Who found a so-called ``loophole'' in the Constitution that allowed American democracy to be legally turned into a dictatorship and shared this with Einstein?
Gödel

The first Arabic inscriptions were not written in the Arabic script. What script was used?
Nabataean

Where was the oldest inscription of the Arabic language found? It was written in the Nabataean script.
Ein Avdat

Where was the second-oldest inscription of the Arabic language discovered? It was written in the Nabataean script and found by Dussaud and Macler in a village in Syria.
Namara

To whom is the chaconne with which Heifetz began his American debut recital traditionally attributed?
Vitali

What people of ancient Arabia, whose settlements lay in the borderlands between Syria and Arabia from the Euphrates River to the Red Sea, were unsuccessfully attacked by Demetrius I Poliorcetes, king of Macedonia, in their mountain fortress of Petra south of the Dead Sea?
Nabataeans

What name refers to a horizontal, continuous lintel on a classical building supported by columns or a wall, comprising the architrave, frieze, and cornice?
entablature

What platform supports a statue above the dado and base?
entablement

What slight convex curve in the shaft of a column is introduced to correct the visual illusion of concavity produced by a straight shaft?
entasis

Define ``entelechy.''
the actualization of form-giving cause as contrasted with potential existence

What alternate term for ``hanuman'' comes from the name of an aged Trojan in Virgil's Aeneid?
entellus

What name is given to the inflammation of the intestine, especially the small intestine, usually accompanied by diarrhea?
enteritis

What Gram-positive streptococcus occurs naturally in the intestine but causes inflammation and blood infection if introduced elsewhere in the body?
enterococcus

What is a toxin produced in or affecting the intestines, such as those causing food poisoning or cholera, called?
enterotoxin

What thermodynamic quantity is equal to the internal energy of the system plus the product of pressure and volume?
enthalpy

What chemical substance, typically of plant origin, is ingested to produce a non-ordinary state of consciousness for religious or spiritual purposes?
entheogen

What is a parasol?
lightweight umbrella used as a sunshade

What soil is of an order comprising mineral soils that have not yet differentiated into distinct horizons?
entisol

What phylum comprises sedentary aquatic invertebrates that resemble moss animals and have a rounded body on a long stalk, bearing a ring of tentacles for filtering food from the water?
Entoprocta

What is an interval between two acts of a play or opera called?
entr'acte

Define ``entrain.''
board a train

During what vertical jump does the dancer repeatedly cross the feet and beat them together?
entrechat

What French word refers to a boned steak cut off the sirloin?
entrecôte

What is an entremets?
light dish served between two courses of a formal meal

What name's given to a port, city, or other centre to which goods are brought for import and export and for collection and distribution?
entrepôt

In what condition is the eyelid rolled inward against the eyeball, typically caused by muscle spasm or by inflammation or scarring of the conjunctiva (as in diseases such as trachoma), and resulting in irritation of the eye by the lashes (trichiasis)?
entropion

Define ``inure.''
accustom to accept something undesirable; come into operation

(1908--85) What Albanian statesman---the founder of the Albanian Communist Party (1941), prime minister (1944--54), and First Secretary of the Albanian Communist Party (1954--85)---rigorously isolated Albania from Western influences and implemented a Stalinist program of nationalization and collectivization?
Enver Hoxha

(1881--1922) What Turkish political and military leader was part of a ruling triumvirate that followed a coup d'état in 1913? He was a leader of the Young Turks in 1908.
Enver Pasha

Define ``environ.''
surround; enclose

What plural noun that refers to the districts around a city comes from the Old French for ``surroundings''?
environs

What name is given to a minister plenipotentiary who ranks below an ambassador and above a chargé d'affaires?
envoy extraordinary

What was Ferrari's first name?
Enzo

What adjective denotes a disease that regularly affects animals in a particular district or at a particular season?
enzootic

What are the two officially recognized languages of Norway?
Bokmål, Nynorsk

What precursor of Bokmål was to be Norway's official language based on Danish?
Riksmål

What precursor of Nynorsk was a more conservative written form created using elements of various rural Norwegian dialects?
Landsmål

Who created Landsmål?
Ivar Aasen

What was to be the unified Norwegian language that combined elements of Bokmål and Nynorsk? This was abandoned in 2002.
Samnorsk

What is the German word for ``theorem''?
Satz

On what date did Raphael decease?
6 April 1520

How old was Raphael when he deceased?
37

Where was Raphael born?
Urbino

Where did Raphael go in around 1495? Here, he painted the Coronation of the Virgin (Oddi Chapel) in the church of San Francesco.
Perugia

(1448--1523) What great Umbrian master was executing the frescos in the Collegio del Cambio at Perugia between 1498 and 1500, enabling Raphael, who was a member of his workshop, to acquire extensive professional knowledge? His calmly exquisite style also influenced Raphael. His Giving of the keys to St. Peter (1481--82), painted for the Sistine Chapel of the Vatican palace, inspired Raphael's first major work, The marriage of the Virgin (1504).
Pietro Perugino

Vasari vaguely recounts that Raphael followed the Perugian painter Bernardino Pinturicchio to Siena and then went on to where? He was drawn there by accounts of the work that Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo were undertaking in that city.
Florence

What architect prompted Pope Julius II to call Raphael to Rome toward the end of 1508?
Donato Bramante

Whom did Raphael depict in a sixteenth-century work with two cardinals?
Leo X

Whom did Raphael paint a portrait of in 1516? The oil-on-canvas painting is in the Louvre and is considered one of the finest Renaissance portraits.
Baldassare Castiglione

Whose triumph does a 1511 Raphael fresco in the Villa Farnesina depict?
Galatea

In what stanza (papal apartment) did Raphael portray specific miraculous events in the history of the Christian church? The four principal subjects are The expulsion of Heliodorus from the temple, The Mass at Bolsena, The liberation of St. Peter, and Leo I halting Attila.
Stanza d'Eliodoro

Raphael's first task in Rome was to paint a cycle of frescos in a suite of medium-sized rooms in the Vatican papal apartments in which Julius II lived and worked. What are these rooms called?
Stanze

Who painted Scuola di Atene `The school of Athens'?
Raphael

Where is Raphael's The school of Athens located? The other main walls in this room are occupied by the Disputa, Parnassus, and Cardinal Virtues.
Stanza della Segnatura

Through what years did Raphael paint the School of Athens?
1508--11

For what is Raphael particularly noted?
madonnas

Whom does Raphael depict halting Attila in a fresco of 1513--14? The fresco is located in the Stanza d'Eliodoro.
Leo I

Who built the Sistine Chapel under commission from Sixtus IV?
Giovanni dei Dolci

Who sculpted Hercules fighting the centaur Nessus in marble from 1595 to 1600? This sculpture is in the Loggia dei Lanzi, Florence.
Giambologna

What does ``eo ipso'' mean?
the thing itself; by that very act or quality; thereby

What is the second epoch of the Tertiary period?
Eocene

What is another term for hyracotherium?
eohippus

What period at the beginning of the Stone Age was characterized by the earliest crude stone tools?
Eolithic

Who is the Greek goddess of the dawn?
Eos

Who is the Roman goddess of the dawn?
Aurora

What red fluorescent dye is a bromine derivative of fluorescein or one of its salts or other derivatives?
eosin

What name is given to the number of days by which the solar year differs from the lunar year?
epact

What name's given to a province of the Orthodox Church?
eparchy

What tall herbaceous plant native to Central America, South America, and southern Mexico is used as a pungent culinary herb and vegetable in Mexican cooking and to make herbal tea?
epazote

What does ``épater les bourgeois'' mean?
shock people who have attitudes or views perceived as conventional or complacent

What thin membrane of glial cells lines the ventricles of the brain and the central canal of the spinal cord?
ependyma

What is the insertion of a sound or letter within a word called?
epenthesis

What is the ornamental centrepiece for a dining table typically used for holding fruit or flowers called?
epergne

What word from the Greek for ``explanation'' means ``the addition of words to clarify meaning''?
epexegesis

What ancient Hebrew dry measure was equivalent to a bushel (35 l)?
ephah

What was a young man of 18--20 years undergoing military training in ancient Greece called?
ephebe

What crystalline alkaloid drug obtained from some ephedras causes constriction of the blood vessels and widening of the bronchial passages and is used to relieve asthma and hay fever? It is systematically named 1-phenyl-2-methylaminopropanol and has the chemical formula C10H15NO.
ephedrine

What was a table or data file giving the calculated positions of a celestial object at regular intervals throughout a period called? Its name comes from the Greek for ``lasting only a day.''
ephemeris

What is an insect that lives only for a day or a few days called?
ephemeron

What does the Latin root quint-- mean?
fifth; quintus; quintary, quintile

What does the Latin root quot-- mean?
how many, how great; quota, quotient

What do the Latin roots rad--, ras-- mean?
scrape, shave; radere, rasus; abrade, abrasion, erasure

What does the Latin root radi-- mean?
beam, spoke; radius, radiare; radiance, radiation

What does the Latin root radic-- mean?
root; rādix, rādīcis; eradicate, radical

What does the Latin root ram-- mean?
branch; rāmus; ramification, ramose

What does the Latin root ran-- mean?
frog; rana; Rana

What does the Latin root ranc-- mean?
rancidness, grudge, bitterness; rancere; rancid, rancor

What does the Latin root rap-- mean?
turnip; rapum; rapeseed

What does the Greek root raph-- mean?
seam; ῤαφή (rhaphē)

What does the Latin root rar-- mean?
rarus; rarity

What does the Latin root rauc-- mean?
harsh, hoarse; raucus; raucous

What do the Latin roots re--, red-- mean?
again, back; re--; recede, redact

What do the Latin roots reg--, --rig--, rect-- mean?
straight; regere, rectus; dirigible, erect, erection, rectum

What does the Latin root rem-- mean?
oar; remus; bireme, trireme

What does the Latin root ren-- mean?
kidney; renes; renal

What do the Latin roots rep--, rept-- mean?
crawl, creep; repere, reptus; reptile

What does the Latin root ret-- mean?
net; rete; reticle, retina

What does the Latin root retro-- mean?
backward, behind; retro; retrograde, retrospective, retrovirus

What does the Greek root rhabd-- mean?
rod; ῥάβδος (rhabdos); rhabdoid, rhabdom

What do the Greek roots rhach--, rach-- mean?
spine; ῥάχις, ῥάχεως (rhachis); rhachiodont

What does the Greek root rhag-- mean?
tear, rent; ῥαγίζω; rhagades

What does the Greek root rhe-- mean?
flow; ῥεῖν (rhein); rheostat

What does the Greek root rhig-- mean?
chill; ῥῖγος (rhigos); rhigosaurus

What does the Greek root rhin-- mean?
nose, snout; ῥίς, ῥινός (rhis, rhinos); rhinoplasty

What does the Greek root rhiz-- mean?
root; ῥίζα (rhiza); rhizome

What does the Greek root rhod-- mean?
rose; ῥόδον (rhodon); rhododendron

What does the Greek root rhomb-- mean?
spinning top; ῥόμβος (rhombos); rhombus

What does the Greek root rhynch-- mean?
snout; ῥύγχος; Rhynchobatus

What do the Latin roots rid--, ris-- mean?
laugh; ridere, risus; derision, ridicule

What does the Latin root robor-- mean?
oak, strength; robur, roboris; corroboration

What do the Latin roots rod--, ros-- mean?
gnaw; rodere, rosus; corrode, erosion, rodent

What does the Latin root rog-- mean?
ask; rogare; derogatory, interrogation

What does the Latin root rostr-- mean?
beak, prow; rostrum; rostral, rostriform, rostrum

What does the Latin root rot-- mean?
wheel; rota, rotare; rotation

What do the Latin roots ruber--, rubr-- mean?
red; ruber; rubric, ruby

What does the Latin root rug-- mean?
wrinkle; ruga, rugare; corrugation

What does the Latin root rumin-- mean?
throat; rumen, ruminis; rumination

What do the Latin roots rump--, rupt-- mean?
break; rumpere, ruptus; eruption, rupture, interrupt

What does the Latin root rur-- mean?
country; rus, ruris; rural

What does the Greek root sacchar-- mean?
sugar; σάκχαρον (sakcharon); saccharin

What do the Latin roots sacr--, secr-- mean?
sacred; sacer, sacrare; consecrate, sacrament

What does the Latin root sagac-- mean?
wise; sagax, sagacis; sagacity

What does the Latin root sagitt-- mean?
arrow; sagitta; sagittal plane, Sagittaria

What does the Latin root sal-- mean?
salt; sal, salis, salere; salinity

What do the Latin roots sali--, --sili--, salt-- mean?
jump; salire, saltus; resilient, salient, saltus

What does the Latin root salic-- mean?
willow; salix, salicis; salicin

What does the Latin root salv-- mean?
save; salvus, salvare; salvation

What does the Latin root san-- mean?
healthy; sanus; insane, sanity

What does the Latin root sanc-- mean?
holy; sancire, sanctus; sanctify, sanctuary

What does the Latin root sanguin-- mean?
blood; sanguis, sanguinis; consanguinity, sanguine

What do the Latin roots sapi--, --sipi-- mean?
taste, wise; sapere; insipience, sapient

What does the Latin root sapon-- mean?
soap; sapo, saponis; saponification

What does the Greek root sarc-- mean?
flesh; σάρξ, σαρκός (sarx, sarkos); sarcophagus

What does the Greek root saur-- mean?
lizard, reptile; σαῦρος (sauros); dinosaur

What does the Latin root sax-- mean?
rock; saxum

What does the Latin root scab-- mean?
scratch; scabere; scabies

What does the Latin root scal-- mean?
ladder, stairs; scala; scalar, scale

What does the Greek root scalen-- mean?
uneven; σκαληνός (skalēnos); scalene muscles, scalene triangle

What do the Latin roots scand--, --scend--, scans--, --scens-- mean?
climb; scandere; ascend, transcendent, descend

What does the Greek root scaph-- mean?
anything hollow, bowl, ship; σκάφη, σκάφος; scaphoid bone

What does the Greek root scel-- mean?
leg, thigh; σκέλος, σκέλεος (skelos); isosceles

What does the Greek root schem-- mean?
plan; σχῆμα (schēma); schematic

What does the Greek root schis-- mean?
split; σχίζω, σχίσμα (schisma); schism

What does the Latin root sci-- mean?
know; scire; prescient, science

What do the Latin roots scind--, sciss-- mean?
split; scindere; rescind, scissors

What does the Greek root scler-- mean? *****
hard; σκληρός (sklēros); scleroderma, sclerosis

What does the Greek root scoli-- mean?
crooked; σκολιός (skolios); scoliosis

What do the Greek roots scop--, scept-- mean?
look at, examine, view, observe; σκέπτομαι, σκοπός (skopos); horoscope, kaleidoscope, stethoscope

What do the Latin roots scrib--, script-- mean?
write; scribere, scriptus; inscribe, scripture

What does the Latin root sculp-- mean?
carve; sculpere, sculptus; sculpture

What does the Latin root scut-- mean?
shield; scutum; scute

What does the Greek root scyph-- mean?
cup; χούφτα (chouphta); Scyphozoa

What do the Latin roots se--, sed-- mean?
apart; se; secede, sedition

What does the Latin root seb-- mean?
tallow; sebum; sebaceous, sebum

What do the Latin roots sec--, sect--, seg-- mean?
cut; secare; secant, section, segment

What does the Latin root sed-- mean?
settle, calm; sedare, sedatus; sedative

What do the Latin roots sed--, --sid--, sess-- mean?
sit; sedere, sessus; reside, sediment, session, supersede

What does the Latin root sedec-- mean?
sixteen; sedecim; sedecimal

What does the Latin root seget-- mean?
in cornfields; segetum

What does the Greek root sei-- mean?
shake; σείω, σεισμός (seismos); seismograph

What does the Greek root selen-- mean?
moon; σελήνη (selēnē); Selene, selenium

What does the Latin root sell-- mean?
saddle, seat; sella; sella turcica

What does the Greek root sema-- mean?
sign; σῆμα (sēma); semantics, semaphore

What does the Latin root semi-- mean?
half; semis; semifinal

What does the Latin root semin-- mean?
seed; semen, seminis; insemination

What does the Latin root sen-- mean?
old man; senex, senis; senator, senility

What does the Latin root sen-- mean?
six each; seni; senary

What do the Latin roots senti--, sens-- mean?
feel; sentire, sensus; consensus, sentient

What does the Latin root sept-- mean?
fence, partition, enclosure; saeptum; transept

What does the Latin root sept-- mean?
seven; septem; septennial

What does the Latin root septen-- mean?
seven each; septeni; septenary

What does the Latin root septim-- mean?
seventh; septimus; septimal, septime

What does the Latin root septuagen-- mean?
seventy each; septuageni; septuagenary

What does the Latin root septuagesim-- mean?
seventieth; septuagesimus; septuagesima, septuagesimal

What does the Latin root septuagint-- mean?
seventy; septuaginta; Septuagint

What do the Latin roots sequ--, secut-- mean?
follow; sequere, secutus; consecutive, sequence

What do the Latin roots ser--, sat-- mean?
cultivate; serere, satus; sative

What does the Latin root ser-- mean?
body fluid; serum; serous

What does the Latin root ser-- mean?
late; serus; serein, serotine

What does the Latin root serp-- mean?
crawl, creep; serpere, serptus; serpent

What does the Latin root serr-- mean?
saw, saw--toothed; serra, serrare; serration

What does the Latin root serv-- mean?
save, protect, serve; servare; conservation

What does the Latin root sesqui-- mean?
one and a half; sesqui; sesquicentennial

What does the Latin root set-- mean?
bristle, hair; saeta; seta, setose

What does the Latin root sever-- mean?
stern, strict, serious; severus; severity

What do the Latin roots sex--, se-- mean?
six; sex; semester, sexangle, sexennium

What does the Latin root sexagen-- mean?
sixty each; sexageni; sexagenary

What does the Latin root sexagesim-- mean?
sixtieth; sexagesimus; sexagesimal

What does the Latin root sext-- mean?
sixth; sextus; sextant

What does the Latin root sibil-- mean?
hiss; sibilus, sibilare; sibilance

What does the Latin root sicc-- mean?
dry; siccus; desiccation

What does the Latin root sider-- mean?
star; sidus, sideris; sidereal

What does the Latin root sign-- mean?
sign; signum; design, designate, signal

What does the Latin root sil-- mean?
quiet or still; silere; silence

What does the Latin root silv(i)-- mean?
forest; silva; silviculture

What does the Latin root simi-- mean?
ape, monkey; simia; simian

What does the Latin root simil-- mean?
likeness, trust, group; similis; assimilate, similarity

What does the Latin root simul-- mean?
imitating, feigning; simulare; simulation

What does the Latin root singul-- mean?
one each; singulus; singular

What does the Latin root sinistr-- mean?
left; sinister, sinistri; sinistral

What does the Latin root sinu-- mean?
(to draw) a line; sinuare; insinuate

What does the Latin root sinus-- mean?
hollow, bay; sinus

What does the Greek root siph(o)-- mean?
tube; σίφων (siphōn); siphon

What does the Latin root sist-- mean?
cause to stand; sistere; consist, persistence

What does the Greek root sit-- mean?
food, grain, wheat; σῖτος (sitos); sitology

What does the Latin root soci-- mean?
group; socius, sociare; associate, social

What does the Latin root sol-- mean?
sun; sol, solis; solar

What does the Latin root sol-- mean?
comfort, soothe; solari; consolation, solace

What does the Latin root sol-- mean?
alone, only; solus; desolate, sole, solo, solipsism

What does the Greek root solen-- mean?
pipe, channel; σωλήν (sōlēn); solenoid

What do the Latin roots solv--, solut-- mean?
loosen, set free; solvere, solutus; dissolve, solution

What does the Greek root soma-- mean?
body; σῶμα, σώματος (sōma, sōmatos); somatic

What does the Latin root somn-- mean?
sleep; somnus; insomnia

What does the Latin root somni-- mean?
dream; somnium

What does the Latin root son-- mean?
sound; sonus; resonance

What does the Greek root soph-- mean?
wise; σοφός (sophos); sophist

What do the Latin roots sorb--, sorpt-- mean?
suck; sorbere; absorb, absorption

What does the Latin root sord-- mean?
dirt; sordes, sordere; sordid

What does the Latin root soror-- mean?
sister; soror; sorority

What does the Latin root spati-- mean?
space; spatium; spatial

What do the Latin roots spec--, --spic--, spect-- mean?
look; specere; conspicuous, inspection, specimen

What does the Latin root spect-- mean?
watch, look at; spectare; spectator

What does the Latin root specul-- mean?
observe; speculari; speculation

What does the Latin root sper-- mean?
hope; spes, sperare; desperation, esperance

What does the Greek root sperm-- mean?
seed; σπέρμα (sperma); angiosperm

What does the Greek root sphen-- mean?
wedge; σφήν (sphēn)

What does the Greek root spher-- mean?
ball; σφαῖρα (sphaira); sphere, spheroid

What does the Greek root sphinct-- mean?
closing; σφίγγα; sphincter

What does the Latin root spic-- mean?
spike; spica; spicule

What does the Latin root spin-- mean?
thorn; spina; spine

What does the Latin root spir-- mean?
breathe; spirare; respiration

What do the Latin roots spond--, spons-- mean?
surety, guarantee; give assurance, promise solemnly; spondere, sponsus; respond

What do the Latin roots spu--, sput-- mean?
spew, spit; spuere; sputum

What does the Latin root squal-- mean?
scaly, dirty, filthy; squalere; squalid, squalor

What does the Latin root squam-- mean?
scale; squama; squamous

What does the Latin root squarros-- mean?
spreading at tips; st--; stand; Latin; stare, status; stable, station, statistic, statue, status

What does the Latin root stagn-- mean?
pool of standing water; stagnare; stagnant

What does the Greek root stalact-- mean?
σταλακτίτης (stalaktitēs); stalactite

What does the Greek root stalagm-- mean?
σταλαγμός (stalagmos); stalagmite

What does the Latin root stann-- mean?
tin; stannum; stannous

What do the Latin roots statu--, --stitu-- mean?
stand; statuere; institution, statute

What does the Greek root stea-- mean?
fat, tallow; στέαρ, στέατος (stear, steatos); stearic acid

What does the Greek root steg-- mean?
covering; steganography

What does the Latin root stell-- mean?
star; stella; constellation, stellar

What does the Greek root sten-- mean?
narrow; στενός (stenos); stenography

What does the Greek root stere-- mean?
solid; στερεός (stereos)

What do the Latin roots stern--, strat-- mean?
spread, strew; sternere, stratus; stratify

What does the Greek root stern-- mean?
breastbone; στέρνον (sternon); sternum

What does the Greek root stich-- mean?
line, row; στίχος (stichos)

What does the Greek root stig-- mean?
στίγμα (stigma); stigma

What does the Latin root still-- mean?
drip; stilla, stillare; distillation

What does the Latin root stimul-- mean?
goad, rouse, excite; stimulus; stimulate

What do the Latin roots stingu--, stinct-- mean?
apart; stinguere; distinction, distinguish

What does the Greek root stoch-- mean?
aim; στόχος; stochastic

What does the Greek root stom-- mean?
mouth; στόμα (stoma); stomatoplasty

What does the Greek root strept-- mean?
twisted; στρεπτός (streptos)

What does the Latin root strig-- mean?
compress; strix, strigis; strigogyps

What does the Latin root strigos-- mean?
having stiff bristles; string--, strict--; upright, stiff; Latin; stringere, strictus; stringent

What does the Greek root stroph-- mean?
turning; στροφή (strophē); apostrophe

What do the Latin roots stru--, struct-- mean?
to make up, build; struere, structus; construction, construe

What does the Latin root stud-- mean?
dedication; studere; student

What does the Latin root stup-- mean?
wonder; stupere; stupor

What does the Greek root styl-- mean?
column, pillar; στῦλος (stulos); stylus

What do the Latin roots su--, sut-- mean?
sew; suere, sutus; suture

What does the Latin root sui-- mean?
self; sui; sui generis, suicide

What do the Latin roots suad--, suas-- mean?
urge; suadere, suasus; persuasion

What does the Latin root suav-- mean?
sweet; suavis; suave

What do the Latin roots sub--, su--, suf--, sug--, sus-- mean?
below; sub; submerge, suffix, suggest

What does the Latin root subter-- mean?
under; subter; subterfuge

What does the Latin root sucr-- mean?
sugar; sucrose

What does the Latin root sud-- mean?
sweat; sudare; sudoriferous

What does the Latin root sulc-- mean?
furrow; sulcus; sulcus

What do the Latin roots sum--, sumpt-- mean?
take; sumere, sumptus; assumption, consume

What does the Latin root super-- mean?
above, over; super; supersede

What does the Latin root supin-- mean?
lying back; supinus; supination

What does the Latin root supra-- mean?
above, over; supra; supranationalism

What does the Latin root surd-- mean?
deaf; surdus; absurdity

What does the Latin root surg-- mean?
rise; surgere; resurgent

What do the Greek roots syn--, sy--, syl--, sym-- mean?
with; σύν (sun); symbol, symmetry, sympathy, synchronous, synonym, system

What does the Greek root syring-- mean?
pipe; σύριγξ, σύριγγος (syrinx, syringos); syringe

Identify the Iraqi port city whose name means ``mother of a palace.''
Umm Qasr

What mathematician provided the unipotent counterexample to Hilbert's fourteenth problem?
Masayoshi Nagata

What mathematician proved that Hilbert's tenth problem is undecidable?
Yuri Matiyasevich

What's the curve in the upper surface of a liquid close to the surface of an object called?
meniscus

Who is known as the ``king of invariant theory''?
Paul Gordan

Who advised Paul Gordan?
Jacobi

Who was Emmy Noether's doctoral advisor?
Gordan

What is Yemen's largest island?
Socotra

What is the capital city of Socotra?
Hadibu

What mountains are found on Socotra?
Hajhir

What is Socotra's highest point?
Mashanig

Define the adjective ``erstwhile.''
former

What is a threnody?
song of lamentation for the dead

What is Bali's chief city?
Denpasar

What does ``cgs'' abbreviate?
centimetre-gram-second

Who exclaimed, ``Hannibal ad portas!''?
Cicero

Translate ``Hannibal ad portas.''
Hannibal at the gates

With what is ``Amazigh'' synonymous?
Berber

What is the Danish name for Nuuk?
Godthåb

Who is the patron saint of Dubrovnik?
St. Blaise

On what river is Osijek?
Drava

What animal symbolizes Torino?
bull

On what river is Antwerp?
Scheldt

What city was called ``Karl-Marx-Stadt''?
Chemnitz

What is the capital of Schleswig-Holstein?
Kiel

What Spanish enclave consists of a port and military post on the coast of Morocco, overlooking the Mediterranean approach to the Strait of Gibraltar?
Ceuta

What is the capital of Jersey?
St. Helier

Who designed Brasília?
Lúcio Costa

When was Goiânia founded?
1933

What historic Peruvian city flies a rainbow flag?
Cuzco

What was Northern Ireland's flag called?
Ulster Banner

Andorra is divided into seven [---].
parishes

How many parishes comprise Andorra?
seven

What island of Equatorial Guinea is home to the nation's capital, Malabo?
Bioko

What is the capital of Carinthia, Austria?
Klagenfurt

What sleeveless garment was worn by Jewish priests in ancient Israel?
ephod

What name was given to one of five senior Spartan magistrates in ancient Greece?
ephor

What is a larval jellyfish called after it has separated from the scyphistoma?
ephyra

What's the flora and fauna living on the surface of the bottom of a sea or lake called?
epibenthos

What's the outermost layer of an embryo before it differentiates into ectoderm and mesoderm called?
epiblast

What serous membrane forms the innermost layer of the pericardium and the outer surface of the heart?
epicardium

What is an epicedium?
funeral ode

(c. 55--c. 135) What Greek philosopher preached the common brotherhood of man and advocated a Stoic philosophy?
Epictetus

What school of philosophy founded in Athens rejected determinism and advocated hedonism (pleasure as the highest good), but of a restrained kind: mental pleasure was regarded more highly than physical, and the ultimate pleasure was held to be freedom from anxiety and mental pain, especially that arising from needless fear of death and of the gods?
Epicureanism

(341--270 BC) The physics of this Greek philosopher and founder of a philosophy school is based on Democritus's theory of a materialist universe composed of indestructible atoms moving in a void, unregulated by divine providence.
Epicurus

What curve is traced by a point on the circumference of a circle rolling on the exterior of another circle?
epicycloid

What loosening of the epidermis, with extensive blistering of the skin and mucous membranes, occurs either after injury or as a spontaneous and potentially dangerous condition, particularly in children?
epidermolysis

What optical projector is capable of giving images of both opaque and transparent objects?
epidiascope

Along what highly convoluted duct behind the testis does sperm pass to the vas deferens?
epididymis

What lustrous yellow-green crystalline mineral that is common in metamorphic rocks consists of a hydroxyl silicate of calcium, aluminum, and iron?
epidote

What's the fluorescence of an object in an optical microscope when irradiated from the viewing side called?
epifluorescence

What part of the upper abdomen is immediately over the stomach?
epigastrium

Define ``epigeal.''
growing on or close to the ground

Define ``hypogeal.''
underground; subterranean

What theory, now generally held, suggests that an embryo develops progressively from an undifferentiated egg cell? It is contrasted with the theory of preformation.
epigenesis

What flap of cartilage at the root of the tongue is depressed during swallowing to cover the opening of the windpipe?
epiglottis

What is an epigram?
concise poem dealing pointedly and often satirically with a single thought or event and often ending with an ingenious turn of thought

How does one describe a plant or flower whose ovary is enclosed in the receptacle, with the stamens and other floral parts situated above?
epigynous

Define ``spatchcock.''
fowl split and grilled usually immediately after being killed and dressed

What aromatized curry from Kashmir is made with red meat and coloured and flavoured by primarily alkanet flower and Kashmiri chillies?
lamb rogan josh

Who wrote Metamorphoses?
Ovid

What poet was banished from Rome by Augustus in 8 AD?
Ovid

Who are the three canonical poets of Latin literature?
Virgil, Horace, Ovid

Who wrote, ``Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori''?
Horace (Odes III.2.13)

Translate ``Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori.''
to die for one's homeland is sweet and proper

In what year did the Western Roman Empire come to an end?
476

Who wrote the Germania?
Tacitus

Whom did Constantius II defeat in the Battle of Mursa?
Magnentius

How many books are there in the Code of Justinian?
4

Who is commonly regarded as the last (though illegitimate) Western Roman emperor?
Romulus Augustulus

What was Vasco da Gama's mother's name?
Mrs. Vasco da Gama

What embedding describes the product of two projective varieties as a projective variety?
Segre embedding

What French word means ``wheat sheaf''?
gerbe

What Greek vessel was slender-bodied with a tall neck and flaring mouth and used from the 6th century for ritual purposes at weddings and funerals?
loutrophoros

What wine jug from the classical period of Greek pottery had a delicately curved handle and trefoil-shaped mouth?
oinochoe

Define ``epilate.''
remove hair from (the body) by pulling it from the root

Define ``anguilliform.''
having the form of an eel

What's the upper layer of water in a stratified lake called?
epilimnion

What's a plant growing on the surface of rock called?
epilithic

What is the posterior part of the sidewall of a thoracic segment in insects called?
epimeron

What is the sheath of fibrous elastic tissue surrounding a muscle called?
epimysium

What word refers to excessive watering of the eye or the repetition at the end of successive clauses or sentences?
epiphora

What is a cactus with flattened stems and large, fragrant red or yellow flowers called?
epiphyllum

What's the end part of a long bone, initially growing separately from the shaft, called?
epiphysis

What's a plant that grows on another plant but is not parasitic, such as the numerous ferns, bromeliads, air plants, and orchids growing on tree trunks in tropical rainforests?
epiphyte

What coastal region of northwestern Greece has its capital in Ioánnina?
Epirus

What is the capital of Epirus, Greece?
Ioánnina

What is the Greek name for Epirus?
Ipiros

What is the interaction of genes that are not alleles, particularly the suppression of the effect of one such gene by another?
epistasis

What is the medical term for bleeding from the nose?
epistaxis

What bone is between the clavicles, especially (in mammals) the upper part of the sternum?
episternum

What is an epistyle?
architrave

What is the natural or artificial growth of crystals on a crystalline substrate determining their orientation?
epitaxy

What part of the dorsal forebrain includes the pineal gland and a region in the roof of the brain's third ventricle?
epithalamus

What is an epithalamium?
song or poem celebrating a marriage

What thin tissue forms the outer layer of a body's surface and lines the alimentary canal and other hollow structures?
epithelium

To what part of an antigen molecule does an antibody attach itself?
epitope

Identify the writer: ``When sacred Night sweeps heavenward, she takes the glad, the winsome day, and folding it, rolls up its golden carpet that had been spread over an abysmal pit. Gone vision-like is the external world, and man, a homeless orphan, has to face, in utter helplessness, naked, alone, the blackness of immeasurable space. Upon himself he has to lean; with mind abolished, thought unfathered, in the dim depths of his soul he sinks, for nothing comes from outside to support or limit him. All life and brightness seem an ancient dream --- while in the substance of the night, unravelled, alien, he now perceives a fateful something that is his by right.''
Fyodor Tyutchev

What term that refers to a mode of biblical interpretation prominent in the Talmudic literature is also used to refer to a separate body of commentaries on Scripture that use this interpretative mode?
midrash

Complete this ancient midrash: ``God and man are in a sense [---].''
twins

What is a discrete valuation ring?
principal ideal domain with a unique non-zero maximal ideal

Who was the last pope of the States of the Church?
Pius XI

What name is used to describe the States of the Church: the period during which the Kingdom of Italy captured Rome?
Prisoner in the Vatican

What pope appealed for aid to the Frankish ruler Pippin III, resulting in his donation?
Stephen II

What law passed by Italy on 13 May 1871 attempted to settle the question of its relationship with the pope after the dissolution of the Papal States?
Law of Guarantees

What treaty between Italy (King Victor Emanuel III) and the Holy See (Pope Pius XI) settled the Roman Question? Vatican City was thereafter an independent state.
Lateran treaty

When was the Lateran treaty signed?
11 February 1929

What is a local ring?
ring with unique maximal ideal

What are the five Glorious Mysteries?
Resurrection; Ascension; descent of the Holy Spirit; Assumption; crowning of Our Lady Queen of Heaven

What are the five Joyful Mysteries?
Annunciation; Visitation, Birth of Our Lord; Presentation in the Temple; finding of Jesus in the temple

What are the five Sorrowful Mysteries?
agony in the Garden; scourging at the pillar; crowning with thorns; carrying of the cross; crucifixion

What are the five Mysteries of Light?
Baptism in the Jordan; wedding feast of Cana; proclamation of the kingdom of God; Transfiguration; institution of the Eucharist

What Ivy League school is near the Finger Lakes?
Cornell

What is the largest of the Finger Lakes?
Cayuga Lake

What region in central New York is named for its series of narrow glacial lakes that lie parallel in a north-south orientation? Canandaigua, Keuka, Seneca, and Cayuga lakes are among the better known.
Finger Lakes

Where is Cornell University?
Ithaca, New York

Where is Brown University?
Providence

Who was the first to prove that the Riemann zeta function has infinitely many roots on the critical line?
Hardy

What two mathematicians determined the asymptotic behaviour of the partition function $p(n)$?
Hardy, Ramanujan

(1917--2007) This Norwegian mathematician was heavily influenced by Ramanujan. He studied at the University of Oslo and taught at Syracuse and the IAS. He spoke at the International Congress (1962), won the Fields Medal (1950) and the Wolf Prize (1986), and was awarded an honourary Abel Prize in 2002. He gave an elementary proof of the prime number theorem, proved many results about the non-trivial roots of the Riemann zeta function, developed an important trace formula, and contributed significantly to sieve theory, analytic number theory, and the theory of automorphic forms. Who is this?
Atle Selberg

Where was Alte Selberg born?
Langesund

When was Selberg born?
14 June 1917

What Italian sculptor sculpted David and Apollo and Daphne?
Gian Lorenzo Bernini

Where was Bernini born?
Naples

Where did Bernini exit?
Rome

When did Bernini exit?
28 November 1680

Translate ``Opus Dei.''
Work of God

What is another term for a jack in cards?
knave

What's a flock of turkeys called?
rafter

What figure --- half man and half demon --- lived in a cave and misled his pursuers by forcing the oxen he stole to walk backward into his den?
Cacus

Define ``sidereal.''
of, relating to, or expressed in relation to stars or constellations

Who founded Pallantium?
Evander

What's the 11th letter of Hebrew? It means ``palm of the hand.''
kaph

What's the 19th letter of the Hebrew alphabet?
koph

What word refers to an elemental being in the theory of Paracelsus that inhabits air or a slender, graceful woman or girl?
sylph

What is a flourish at the end of a signature called?
paraph

What's an image of a Semitic household god?
teraph

What mixture of mastic resin and linseed oil was added to oil paints and widely used in the 19th century?
megilp

Translate ``nemo dat quod non habet.''
no one gives what he does not have

What is the basic principle that a person who does not own property, especially a thief, cannot confer it on another except with the true owner's authority?
nemo dat quod non habet

Define ``deleterious.''
causing harm or damage

Give an example of an infinite field of characteristic $p$.
rational functions over $\mathbf{F}_p$

What Richard Strauss tone poem depicts ``the last hours of a man who had striven for the highest ideals''? It is partitioned into four sections.
Tod und Verklärung `Death and transfiguration'

What is an animal that lives on the body of another animal, especially as a parasite?
epizoon

In what form of lyric poem written in couplets is a long line followed by a shorter one? The name is also given to the third section of an ancient Greek choral ode or one division of such an ode.
epode

What is the fifth Greek letter?
epsilon

In what county is Epsom located?
Surrey

Where are the annual Derby and Oaks horse races held?
Epsom Downs

Of what group was sculptor Sir Jacob Epstein a founding member?
Vorticist/London

What narrative poem resembles an epic poem in style but is notably shorter?
epyllion

What state is known as ``the equality state''?
Wyoming

Define ``equanimity.''
mental calmness, composure, and evenness of temper, especially in a difficult situation

What imaginary circle was introduced in the Ptolemaic system with the purpose of reconciling the planetary movements with the hypothesis of uniform circular motion?
equant

In what year did Equatorial Guinea become fully independent?
1968

In what year did Equatorial Guinea become a constitutional democracy?
1991

What is the only independent Spanish-speaking state on the continent of Africa?
Equatorial Guinea

What officer of the British royal household attends or assists members of the royal family? The name once referred to an officer of the household of a prince or noble who had charge over the stables.
equerry

What ancient Roman class of citizens originally formed the cavalry of the Roman army and, at a later period, were a wealthy class of great political importance?
equites

What is the singular of ``equites''?
eques

What spiral has the same angle between the tangent and the radius vector for all of its points?
logarithmic/equiangular

What is a mammal of the horse family called?
equid

Define ``equifinal.''
having the same effect or outcome from initially different events

On what date is the duration of daylight and darkness equal?
equilux

What is either of the two points at which the ecliptic cuts the celestial equator called?
equinoctial point

What is another term for ``solar year''?
equinoctial year

Define ``equipollent.''
equal or equivalent in power, effect, or significance

What plant genus comprises the horsetails?
Equisetum

What is the art and practice of horsemanship and horse riding?
equitation

What is the right of a mortgagor over the mortgaged property, especially the right to redeem the property on payment of the principal, interest, and costs?
equity of redemption

What fundamental postulate of general relativity states that, at any point of spacetime, one cannot experimentally distinguish the effects of a gravitational field from those due to an accelerated frame of reference?
equivalence principle

What three properties must an equivalence relation satisfy?
reflexivity, symmetry, transitivity

What is an equivoque?
expression capable of having more than one meaning; pun

What small northern constellation (the Foal or Little Horse) that, perhaps, represents the brother of Pegasus has no bright stars?
Equuleus

What mountain range in northern Morocco runs parallel to the Mediterranean Sea about 290 km east of Tangier? Rising to over 7,000 feet (2,250 m), it forms a western extension of the Atlas Mountains.
Er Rif

What proposed amendment to the American Constitution states that civil rights may not be denied based on one's sex?
Equal Rights Amendment

What is the doctrine that the state should have supremacy over the Church in ecclesiastical matters (wrongly attributed to its eponym)?
Erastianism

(1524--83) What Swiss theologian, physician, and professor of medicine at Heidelberg from 1558 opposed the imposition of a Calvinistic system of church government in the city?
Erastus

What was Erastus's Swiss name?
Thomas Lieber

Who is the Muse of lyric poetry and hymns?
Erato

(c. 275--194 BC) What Greek scholar, geographer, and astronomer was the first systematic geographer of antiquity? This eponym of a prime sieve accurately calculated the circumference of the earth.
Eratosthenes

What is the chemical symbol of erbium?
Er

What is the atomic number of erbium?
68

What is the sum of the atomic numbers of the four elements named after Ytterby, Sweden?
242

What four elements are named after Ytterby, Sweden?
yttrium, terbium, erbium, ytterbium

Where was Richard Strauss born?
München

Where is the Strauss Villa?
Garmisch-Partenkirchen

Where did Strauss exit?
Garmisch-Partenkirchen

What alpine ski town is nicknamed ``Ga-Pa''?
Garmisch-Partenkirchen

Who is the primeval god of darkness, son of Chaos? He is the eponym of an Antarctic volcano.
Erebus

What volcanic peak on Ross Island, Antarctica that rises to 3,794 m is the world's most southern active volcano?
Mount Erebus

What is the biblical name for Uruk?
Erech

What is the Arabic name for Uruk?
Warka

What marble temple of the Ionic order was built on the Acropolis in Athens circa 421--406 BC with shrines to Athena, Poseidon, and Erechtheus, a legendary king of Athens? It is most famous for its southern portico, in which six caryatids support the entablature.
Erechtheum

What three-letter conjunction means ``before in time''?
ere

What founder of Bauhaus did Mahler's wife marry after his death?
Walter Gropius

What heart disease did Mahler contract before his death?
bacterial endocarditis

What motif is found at the beginning of Mahler's ninth symphony, in the last movement of his Das klagende Lied, in Richard Strauss's Tod und Verklärung, in the development of the first movement of Tchaikovsky's Pathétique, and in the second act of Wagner's Tristan und Isolde?
heartbeat

What unit of energy is homonymous with an area of shifting sand dunes in the Sahara?
erg

What case of nouns (in some languages like Basque and Inuktitut) identifies the subject of a transitive verb and is different from that which identifies the subject of an intransitive verb?
ergative

What mathematical adjective describes systems or processes with the property that, given sufficient time, they include or impinge on all points in a given space and can be represented statistically by a reasonably large selection of points?
ergodic

What alkaloid present in ergot has oxytocic activity and is given to control bleeding after childbirth? It is an amide of lysergic acid.
ergometrine

From what postulated region around a theoretic black hole might energy escape?
ergosphere

What compound present in ergot and many other fungi is converted to vitamin D2 when irradiated with ultraviolet light? It is a steroid alcohol.
ergosterol

In what fungal disease of rye and other cereals do black elongated fruiting bodies grow in the ears of the cereal?
ergot

What Chinese two-stringed instrument is held in the lap and played with a bow?
erhu

Who controls every aspect of life in Nineteen eighty-four?
Big Brother

(1882--1940) What English sculptor, engraver, and typographer did the relief carvings Stations of the cross (1914--18) at Westminster Cathedral and the Prospero and Ariel (1931) on Broadcasting House in London? He also designed the first sans serif typeface.
Eric Gill

What American speed skater was the world champion in speed skating in 1977, 1978, and 1979 before he won five gold medals at the 1980 Olympic games?
Eric Heiden

(1902--45) What British runner and missionary, born in China, won the 400 metres in world record time in the 1924 Olympics? His exploits were celebrated in the movie Chariots of fire (1981).
Eric Liddell

(1900--80) The works of this German-born American psychoanalyst and social philosopher, which include Escape from freedom (1941), Man for himself (1947), and The sane society (1955), emphasize the role of culture in neurosis and strongly criticize materialist values. What was his name?
Erich Fromm

What long straggling southern constellation (the River) is said to represent the river into which Phaethon fell when struck by Zeus's thunderbolt?
Eridanus

What is an Erinys?
Fury

Define ``eristic.''
characterized by disputatious and often subtle and specious reasoning

What bearded giant or goblin of Germanic myth lures little children to the land of death?
Erl-King

On what river is Erlangen, Germany?
Regnitz

(1874--1965) What American physiologist showed that the velocity of a nerve impulse is proportional to the diameter of the fibre in collaboration with Herbert Gasser? He won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine (1944) with Gasser.
Joseph Erlanger

What is fur resembling ermine but with black spots on a gold ground called in heraldry?
erminois

What name is given to a stoat, especially when in its white winter coat?
ermine

What was the name of Shackleton's ship?
Endurance

(1866--1927) What English physiologist and founder of the science of endocrinology demonstrated the existence of peristalsis and coined the term ``hormone'' for the substance secreted by the pancreas that stimulates the secretion of digestive juices?
Ernest Henry Starling

What physicists won the Nobel Prize for Physics (1951) after successfully splitting the atom?
Sir John Cockroft, Ernest Walton

What baseball player was known as ``Mr. Cub''?
Ernie Banks

What was Mach's first name?
Ernst

What is asteroid 433?
Eros

Who is the god of love, son of Aphrodite?
Eros

Who is the Roman equivalent of Eros?
Cupid

What solid compound present in mustard and rape seeds has the chemical formula C21H41COOH?
erucic acid

What is the formal verb for emitting stomach gas noisily through the mouth?
eruct

What urban area enclosed by a wire boundary symbolically extends the private domain of Jewish households into public areas and permits activities within it that are normally forbidden in public on the Sabbath?
eruv

Who was known as ``Dr. J''?
Julius Erving

What German field marshal was known as ``the desert fox''?
Erwin Rommel

What two physicists shared the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1933?
Dirac, Schrödinger

What is a plant of a genus in the parsley family, especially (in gardening) sea holly, called?
eryngium

For what is ``eryngo'' another term?
sea holly

What acute, sometimes recurrent disease caused by a bacterial infection is characterized by large, raised red patches on the skin, especially that of the face and legs, with fever and severe general illness? It is caused by the Gram-positive Streptococcus pyogenes.
erysipelas

Is Streptococcus pyogenes Gram-positive or Gram-negative?
Gram-positive

What dermatitis of the hands due to bacterial infection occurs mainly among handlers of meat and fish products? It is caused by the Gram-positive Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae that occurs as either slightly curved rods or filaments.
erysipeloid

What is the superficial reddening of the skin, usually in patches, as a result of injury or irritation causing dilatation of the blood capillaries?
erythema

What sweet substance extracted from certain lichens and algae is used medicinally as a vasodilator? This tetrahydric alcohol has the chemical formula C4H10O4.
erythritol

What is an immature erythrocyte containing a nucleus called?
erythroblast

To what genus does the dogtooth violet belong?
Erythronium

What's the production of red blood cells called?
erythropoiesis

What hormone is secreted by the kidneys to increase the rate of production of red blood cells in response to falling levels of oxygen in the tissue?
erythropoietin

What mountain range on the border between Germany and the Czech Republic has the other name ``Ore Mountains''?
Erzgebirge

As what is Erzgebirge also known?
Ore Mountains

Translate ``Ein Heldenleben.''
A hero's life

Who was the President of the United States in 1955?
Dwight D. Eisenhower

Where were the 1992 Olympics held?
Barcelona

What adjective describes something about cartilage?
chondral

What Vietnamese monk founded the Plum Village Tradition?
Thích Nhất Hạnh

What substance that occurs in the nutgalls made by insects on oak trees has the chemical formula C76H52O46?
tannic acid

(1755--1840) What great collector and connoisseur of stringed instruments was one of the first to recognize the genius of Stradivari and later became a sponsor of G. B. Guadagnini?
Count Ignazio Alessandro Cozio di Salabue

What Swedish village is the eponym of four elements? Eight elements were discovered here first.
Ytterby

What Shakespeare narrative poem of 1594 details a Roman soldier named ``Tarquin'' attacking a Roman noblewoman?
The rape of Lucrece

What originally Chaucerian rhyming stanza is structured ABABBCC?
rhyme royal

What volatile synthetic organic compound used as a general anesthetic has the chemical formula CF3CHBrCl?
halothane

What is the pointing or specifying function of some words (such as definite articles and demonstrative pronouns) whose denotation changes from one discourse to another?
deixis

What pale fine-grained volcanic rock of granitic composition is typically porphyritic in texture?
rhyolite

What railroad director, yachtsman, and champion bridge player was pictured on the cover of Time with his yacht Enterprise?
Harold Stirling Vanderbilt

What national paramilitary police force in Italy was an elite military organization in the Savoyard states before becoming part of the Italian armed forces during national unification?
carabinieri

What founder of Roman epic poetry and drama translated The odyssey into Latin?
Livius Andronicus

Who was the first American president to be impeached?
Andrew Johnson

What ocean has the most coastline on it?
Atlantic

How many bones are in the human body?
206

How many countries are in Africa?
54

What is the name of the first novel in the Harry Potter series?
Harry Potter and the philosopher's stone

Pronounce ``chthonic.''
ˈTHänik

What does ``en pocas palabras'' mean?
in a nutshell

What separate section of a play is found at the beginning of Shakespeare's Taming of the shrew?
induction

What is Othello's title in the play?
Moor of Venice

Define ``expostulate.''
express strong disapproval or disagreement

For what is ``grippe'' an old term?
influenza

What is an esquisse?
rough or preliminary sketch

What deliberate misspelling of a renowned magazine mocks the magazine for typographical flaws?
Grauniad

What does ``SGA'' abbreviate?
Séminaire de Géométrie Algébrique

What does ``EGA'' abbreviate?
Éléments de Géométrie Algébrique

``His family is particularly étriqué.'' What does ``étriqué'' mean here?
narrow-minded

Where was Karl Popper born?
Vienna

What plan named after its creator was designed to allow Germany to wage a successful two-front war but was significantly altered by von Moltke? These changes were blamed for Germany's failure to swiftly prevail in World War I.
Schlieffen plan

What does the second moment of a probability distribution about the mean give?
variance

What does the third moment of a probability distribution about the mean give?
skewness

What does the fourth moment of a probability distribution about the mean give?
kurtosis

(b. 1925) What Japanese physicist investigated and pioneered the development of quantum-mechanical tunnelling of electrons in semiconductor devices and designed the tunnel diode? He shared the 1973 Nobel Prize for Physics with Ivar Giaever (b. 1929) and Brian D. Josephson (b. 1940).
Leo Esaki

What elder of the twin sons of Isaac and Rebecca sold his birthright to his brother Jacob and was tricked out of his father's blessing by his brother (Gen. 25, 27)?
Esau

What's a French squadron of aircraft called?
escadrille

What's a contract clause that allows for an increase or a decrease in wages or prices under certain conditions called?
escalator clause

What thin slice of meat without any bone, typically a special cut of veal from the leg, is coated, fried, and served in a sauce?
escalope

What is escape velocity on earth in km/s?
11.186 km/s

What is the French name for Scheldt?
Escaut

Define ``eschar.''
dry, dark scab or falling away of dead skin, typically caused by a burn, or by the bite of a mite, or as a result of anthrax infection

What part of theology is concerned with death, judgment, and the final destiny of the soul and of humankind?
eschatology

What name is assigned to the final event in the divine plan or the end of the world in theology?
eschaton

Define ``escheat.''
the reversion of property to the state, or (in feudal law) to a lord, on the owner's dying without legal heirs

(1846--1935) What French chef gained an international reputation while working in London at the Savoy Hotel (1890--99) and later at the Carlton (1899--1919)?
Georges-Auguste Escoffier

What large, elongated predatory fish occurring in tropical and temperate oceans throughout the world is also called a snake mackerel?
escolar

What is the alternative name for an escolar?
snake mackerel

What is an escritoire?
small writing desk with drawers and compartments

What was the basic monetary unit of Portugal (until the introduction of the euro) that was equal to 100 centavos?
escudo

Define ``esculent.''
fit to be eaten; edible

Who designed El Escorial?
Juan Bautista de Toledo

Define ``esemplastic.''
moulding into one; unifying

What active ingredient of the Calabar bean is used medicinally in eye drops because of its anticholinergic activity? It has the chemical formula C15H21N3O2.
physostigmine

For what is ``eserine'' another term?
physostigmine

What city of Iran was the capital of Persia from 1598 to 1722?
Isfahan

What small New World curlew with a striped head was formerly common in the arctic tundra but is now close to extinction?
Eskimo curlew

Define ``esoteric.''
intended for or likely to be understood by only a small number of people with a specialized knowledge or interest

What light canvas shoe has a plaited fibre sole?
espadrille

Define ``espy.''
catch sight of

What is the largest island of Vanuatu?
Espiritu Santo

What suburb of Helsinki is Finland's second-largest city?
Espoo

What French phrase is used to refer to the fact that a witty remark or retort often comes to mind after the opportunity to make it has passed?
esprit de l'escalier

What device removes suspended dust particles from a gas or exhaust by applying a high-voltage electrostatic charge and collecting the particles on charged plates?
electrostatic precipitator

What does Esq. abbreviate?
Esquire

In what valley is Essen?
Ruhr

What ancient Jewish ascetic sect that existed from the 2nd century BC to the 2nd century AD in Palestine lived in highly organized groups and held property in common? They are widely regarded as the authors of the Dead Sea Scrolls.
Essenes

What river in Guyana rises in the Guiana Highlands and flows north for about 965 km to the Atlantic Ocean?
Essequibo

What is the county town of Essex?
Chelmsford

What is an estaminet?
small cafe in France that sells alcoholic drinks

What woman was chosen on account of her beauty by the Persian king Ahasueru --- supposedly Xerxes I --- to be his queen? She used her influence with him to save the Israelites in captivity from persecution.
Esther

What is a star with (usually six) wavy points or rays called in heraldry?
estoile

What principle precludes a person from asserting something contrary to what is implied by a previous action or statement or by a prior pertinent judicial determination?
estoppel

What major estrogen is produced in the ovaries?
estradiol

What metabolic product of estradiol is one of the other three estrogens?
estriol

What estrogen is similar to but less potent than estradiol?
estrone

What is the recurring period of sexual receptivity and fertility in many female mammals called?
estrus

What type of accent is identified as spreading outward from London and containing features of both received pronunciation and London speech?
Estuary English

In what heated chamber is Madeira wine stored and matured?
estufa

Who commissioned the building of the Sanssouci in Potsdam?
Frederick the Great

Where was Jean Dieudonné born?
Lille

What is observed in commemoration of the Jews killed in the Holocaust?
Yom Ha'shoah

What day celebrates the establishment of the State of Israel?
Yom Ha'atzmaut

What Basque separatist movement in Spain was founded in 1959?
ETA

Define ``étagère.''
piece of furniture with a number of open shelves for displaying ornaments

What device consisting of two reflecting glass plates is employed for measuring minute differences in the wavelength of light using the interference it produces?
etalon

What acid or corrosive chemical is used in etching --- that is, a mordant?
etchant

What powerful diuretic drug that is used mainly in the treatment of edema resulting from heart failure has the chemical formula C13H12Cl2O4?
ethacrynic acid

What synthetic compound with bacteriostatic properties that is used in combination with other drugs in the treatment of tuberculosis has the chemical formula C10H24N2O2?
ethambutol

What is the systematic chemical name for acetaldehyde?
ethanal

What is the systematic chemical name for acetamide?
ethanamide

What is the systematic chemical name for ethylene glycol?
ethanediol

What is the systematic chemical name for acetic acid?
ethanoic acid

For what is ``ethchlorvynol'' another name?
Placidyl

What was the last name of the husband-wife pair of the Communist Party that was tried and convicted of espionage in 1951 and executed in 1953?
Rosenberg

Define ``ethereal.''
extremely delicate and light in a way that seems too perfect for this world

What Ethiopian emperor was restored by the British in 1941 and ruled until being overthrown in a Marxist coup in 1974?
Haile Selassie

What ancient Semitic language of Ethiopia is the liturgical language of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church?
Ge'ez

For what is ``Ethiopic'' another term?
Ge'ez

What square bone at the root of the nose that forms part of the cranium has many perforations through which the olfactory nerves pass to the nose?
ethmoid

What is the systematic chemical name for diethyl ether?
ethoxyethane

What colourless volatile liquid with a fruity smell is used as a plastics solvent and in flavourings and perfumes? It has the chemical formula CH3COOC2H5.
ethyl acetate

What synthetic crystalline compound used in making pesticides and fungicides --- formerly as an anesthetic --- has the chemical formula CO(NH2)OC2H5?
urethane

What colourless flammable liquid hydrocarbon, used in the manufacture of styrene, has the chemical formula C6H5C2H5?
ethylbenzene

What colourless viscous hygroscopic liquid used as an antifreeze, in the manufacture of polyesters, and in the preservation of ancient waterlogged timbers has the chemical formula CH2(OH)CH2OH?
ethylene glycol

Define ``etic.''
of, relating to, or involving analysis of cultural phenomena from the perspective of one who does not participate in the culture being studied

What boys' public school in southern England, on the River Thames opposite Windsor, was founded in 1440 by Henry VI to prepare scholars for King's College, Cambridge?
Eton College

Who founded Eton College in 1440?
Henry VI

When did Henry VI found Eton College?
1440

What depression in the plateau in northern Namibia is filled with salt water and has no outlets? It covers an area of 4,800 square kilometres.
Etosha Pan

What spicy Cajun stew is made with vegetables and seafood?
étouffée

What does ``deedni'' mean?
indeed

What are the lyrics to Verdi's Chorus of the Hebrew Slaves?
Va, pensiero, sull'ali dorate; / va, ti posa sui clivi, sui colli, / ove olezzano tepide e molli / l'aure dolci del suolo natal! / Del Giordano le rive saluta, / di Sionne le torri atterrate. / O, mia patria, sì bella e perduta! / O, membranza, sì cara e fatal! / Arpa d'or dei fatidici vati, / perché muta dal salice pendi? / Le memorie nel petto raccendi, / ci favella del tempo che fu! / O simile di Sòlima ai fati / traggi un suono di crudo lamento, / o t'ispiri il Signore un concento / che ne infonda al patire virtù!

What is a hemiola?
ratio 3:2

Define ``sagacious.''
of keen and farsighted penetration and judgment

What is an etrier?
short rope ladder with a few rungs of wood or metal

Between the Arno and Tiber Rivers, what ancient region in western Italy corresponds approximately to modern Tuscany and parts of Umbria? It was the centre of a civilization of a similar name.
Etruria

What was an etui?
small ornamental case for holding needles, cosmetics, and other articles

What island in Greece in the western Aegean Sea is separated from the mainland by a narrow channel at Chalcis, which is its capital?
Euboea

What is the Greek name for Euboea?
Évvoia

For what is ``Évvoia'' the Greek name?
Euboea

Who apparently invented the term ``eucatastrophe'' in a 1944 letter?
J. R. R. Tolkien

What highly basic form of gabbro contains anorthite or bytownite with augite?
eucrite

Define ``eudaemonic.''
conducive to happiness

What is eudaemonism?
system of ethics that bases moral value on the likelihood that good actions will produce happiness

In what graduated glass tube do mixtures of gases react by an electric spark? It is used to measure changes in the volume of gases during chemical reactions.
eudiometer

(1912--94) What Romanian-born French playwright and leading exponent of the Theatre of the Absurd wrote The bald prima donna (1950), Rhinoceros (1960), and Exit the king (1962)?
Eugène Ionesco

(1888--1953) What American playwright was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for his first full-length play, Beyond the horizon (1920)? He also wrote The iceman cometh (1946) and Long day's journey into night (1956, posthumously) and won the Nobel Prize for Literature (1936).
Eugene O'Neill

(1899--1985) What Hungarian-born American conductor was conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra from 1938 to 1980, the longest directorship of an orchestra in American history?
Eugene Ormandy

(1822--1911) What English scientist founded eugenics?
Sir Francis Galton

(1826--1920) What Spanish empress of France (1853--70) and wife of Napoleon III was a significant influence on her husband's foreign policy?
Eugénie

What colourless or pale yellow liquid compound present in the oil of cloves and other essential oils and used in perfumery has the chemical formula C10H12O2?
eugenol

What green single-celled freshwater protist with a flagellum sometimes forms a green scum on stagnant water?
euglena

For what is ``eulachon'' another term?
candlefish

What is another term for ``candlefish''?
eulachon

Who shared the 1929 Nobel Prize for Chemistry with Arthur Harden? He worked mainly on enzymes and vitamins and explained the role of enzymes in the alcoholic fermentation of sugar.
Hans von Euler-Chelpin

Who shared the 1970 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine with Bernard Katz and Julius Axelrod? He was the first to discover a prostaglandin, which he isolated from semen, and also identified norepinephrine as the principal chemical neurotransmitter of the sympathetic nervous system.
Ulf von Euler

What name given to the Furies probably referred to well-disposed deities of fertility?
Eumenides

Define ``eunuch.''
castrated man placed in charge of a harem or employed as a chamberlain in a palace

What shrub or small tree is widely cultivated for its autumn colours and bright fruit? The name can refer to numerous species, including the spindle tree.
euonymus

When did Henry VIII found Christ Church, Oxford?
1546

Who designed Tom Tower, Christ Church, Oxford?
Sir Christopher Wren

When was Sir Christopher Wren born?
30 October 1632

Who designed St. Paul's Cathedral, London (1675--1711)?
Sir Christopher Wren

What is the largest quadrangle in Oxford?
Tom Quad, Christ Church

What constituent college of the University of Oxford has alumni including King Edward VII, King William II of the Netherlands, seventeen Archbishops, writers Lewis Carroll and W. H. Auden, philosopher John Locke, and scientist Robert Hooke?
Christ Church

What foundation originally included one Organist and eight Lay Clerks, but now, at any one time, consists of approximately sixteen Choristers (boys), six Lay Clerks (professional adult singers) and six Academical Clerks (undergraduates) who are also known as Choral Scholars, in addition to the Director of Music (who bears the official historic title of ``Organist''), the Sub-Organist, and one or two Organ Scholars?
Christ Church Cathedral Choir

What service follows the traditional pattern in The Book of Common Prayer and consists of choral music (psalms, canticles, and anthems) from the Anglican musical tradition, scripture readings, and prayers? The Christ Church Cathedral Choir performs it at 6 pm every day except Monday.
evensong

(c. 1556--1612) What Italian composer and organist composed motets and works for performance in St. Mark's Cathedral, Venice?
Giovanni Gabrieli

What Italian composer was appointed maestro di cappella of St. Mark's, Venice, in 1613?
Claudio Monteverdi

What's a quadrangle?
four-sided enclosure, especially when surrounded by buildings

What rare noun means ``good digestion''?
eupepsia

What order includes the krill?
Euphausiaceae

What name is given to a shrimplike planktonic marine crustacean of an order that includes krill?
euphausiid

What instrument's name comes from the Greek for ``having a pleasing sound''?
euphonium

Define ``euphony.''
the quality of being pleasing to the ear

What genus comprises the spurges?
Euphorbia

What's a plant of the genus of the same name in the figwort family, especially eyebright, called?
euphrasia

Define ``euphuism.''
elegant Elizabethan literary style marked by excessive use of balance, antithesis, and alliteration and by frequent use of similes drawn from mythology and nature

What is a nucleus, cell, or organism called if it has an integer multiple of the haploid number of chromosomes?
euploid

What floating freshwater plant of the family Hydrocharitaceae has creeping stems that bear clusters of small rounded leaves?
frogbit

When was Euratom established?
1957

What does ``Euratom'' abbreviate?
European Atomic Energy Community

What system of rhythmical physical movements to music used to teach musical understanding (especially in Steiner schools) or for therapeutic purposes was evolved by Émile Jaques-Dalcroze?
eurhythmics

What is the rate of interest used in lending between banks on the European Union interbank market and as a reference for setting the interest rate on other loans?
EURIBOR

What does ``EURIBOR'' abbreviate?
Euro interbank offered rate

What does ``LIBOR'' abbreviate?
London interbank offered rate

What is the rate of interest used in lending between banks on the London interbank market and as a reference for setting the interest rate on other loans?
LIBOR

How many of Euripides's plays survive?
19

(480--c. 406 BC) His nineteen surviving plays show important innovations in the handling of traditional myths, such as the introduction of realism, an interest in feminine psychology, and the portrayal of abnormal and irrational states of mind. What Greek playwright wrote Medea, Hippolytus, Electra, Trojan Women, and Bacchae?
Euripides

What Galilean moon is the sixth-closest satellite to Jupiter? It is characterized by a network of dark lines on a bright icy surface.
Europa

What princess of Tyre was courted by Zeus in the form of a bull? She was carried off by him to Crete, where she bore him three sons (Minos, Rhadamanthus, and Sarpedon).
Europa

When was the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development established in London?
1991

Where was the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development established in 1991?
London

When was the European Free Trade Association established?
1960

What does ``EFTA'' abbreviate?
European Free Trade Association

What countries were original members of the European Free Trade Association?
Austria, Denmark, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, UK

What terrapin (Emys orbicularis) with a dark shell that is typically patterned with yellow is native to Europe, western Asia, and north-western Africa?
pond terrapin

What was the official name for the Marshall Plan?
European Recovery Program

What small Eurasian deer lacks a visible tail and has a reddish summer coat that turns greyish in winter?
roe

What Moroccan city's name means ``look at the horns'' in Berber?
Chefchaouen

What Mesozoic marine reptile of a group characterized by a single upper temporal opening in the skull includes the nothosaurs, plesiosaurs, and ichthyosaurs?
euryapsid

Who was Orpheus's wife?
Eurydice

Who was Eurydice's husband?
Orpheus

By what was Eurydice killed?
snake

How does one describe an aquatic organism that can tolerate a wide range of salinity?
euryhaline

Where was Eusebio born?
Mozambique

(c. 264--c. 340 AD) His Ecclesiastical history is the principal source for the history of Christianity (especially in the Eastern Church) from the age of the Apostles until 324. What bishop and Church historian wrote this?
Eusebius

What is the Basque term for the Basque language?
Euskara

What narrow passage leading from the pharynx to the cavity of the middle ear permits the equalization of pressure on each side of the eardrum?
Eustachian tube

What is the change of sea level throughout the world caused typically by movements of parts of the earth's crust or melting of glaciers called?
eustasy

What road in London, which was the site of a former School of Drawing and Painting (1938--39), gave its name to a group of English post-impressionist realistic painters of the 1930s, whose members included William Coldstream (1908--87) and Victor Pasmore (1908--98)?
Euston Road

With what word does one describe a mixture of substances that melts and freezes at a single temperature that is lower than the melting points of the separate constituents or any other mixture of them?
eutectic

Who is the Muse of flutes?
Euterpe

What major group of mammals comprises the placentals?
Eutheria

What was the name of the orchestral funeral march that Mahler finished in the same year as his first symphony? He played it for Hans von Bülow, who rejected it.
Totenfeier

What collection of German folk tales did Mahler use for several song settings? The settings for Des Antonius von Padua Fischpredigt and Urlicht appear in his second symphony.
Des Knaben Wunderhorn

On what date did Mahler conduct the first complete performance of his second symphony? The concert was in Berlin.
13 December 1895

Through what years did Mahler compose his second symphony?
1887--94

What is the difference between a division ring and a field?
division ring need not have commutative multiplication

Whose ``little'' theorem that was elegantly proved by Witt says that every finite domain is a field?
Wedderburn

Name some agglutinative languages.
Finnish, Hungarian, Turkish, Japanese

What branch of the Turkic language family includes Turkish, Azerbaijani, Turkmen, and Qashqai?
Oghuz

Define ``evanesce.''
pass out of sight, memory, or existence

(1608--47) What Italian mathematician and physicist invented the mercury barometer, with which he demonstrated that the atmosphere exerts a pressure sufficient to support a column of mercury in an inverted closed tube?
Evangelista Torricelli

(1912--88) What Canadian jazz pianist, composer, and arranger began a long association with Miles Davis in 1947, producing albums such as Porgy and Bess (1958) and Sketches of Spain (1959)?
Gil Evans

What is the regular variation in the eccentricity of the moon's orbit around the earth, caused mainly by the sun's attraction?
evection

(1620--1706) What English diarist and writer is remembered chiefly for his Diary (published posthumously in 1818) that describes such important historical events as the Great Plague and the Great Fire of London?
John Evelyn

What name is given to a member of an indigenous people living in the Kamchatka peninsula of eastern Siberia or the Tungusic language that they speak?
Even

How many toes do even-toed ungulates have on each foot?
two or four

To what order do the even-toed ungulates belong?
Artiodactyla

Name some even-toed ungulates.
ruminant, camel, pig, hippopotamus

How many toes do odd-toed ungulates have?
one or three

To what order do the odd-toed ungulates belong?
Perissodactyla

Name some odd-toed ungulates.
horse, rhinoceros, tapir

What literary noun refers to the onset of evening or dusk?
evenfall

What plant has pale yellow flowers that open in the evening? Numerous species belong to the family Onagraceae.
evening primrose

What is another name for the Evenki people of northern Siberia?
Tungus

As what are the Tungus people better known?
Evenki

Beyond what boundary around a theoretical black hole can no light or radiation escape?
event horizon

What is the Tibetan name for Mount Everest?
Qomolungma

What is the Evergreen State?
Washington

What is eversion?
the action of turning a structure or organ outwards or inside out

(b. 1954) What American tennis player won both the US and French Open championships six times and Wimbledon three times (1974, 1976, 1981)?
Chris Evert

Of what city was Jacques Médecin the mayor?
Nice

What collection of chants was compiled by the monks of the Solesmes Abbey?
Liber Usualis

Who is Nabucodonosor?
Nebuchadnezzar

A group of mice furiously prepares for the upcoming cold. As they scramble to store up food and supplies, one mouse instead soaks in the sights and sounds around him. At first, the mice resent him, but, in the end, at the depths of their isolation and doldrums, his beautiful poetry about the natural world warms their heart and souls. What children's book is this?
Frederick

``Nothing is wholly within or without, for the interior determines the exterior.'' Identify the work and author.
``Epirrhema,'' Goethe

What is a melisma?
elaboration of one note

What meat is found in shepherd's pie?
lamb

Any algebraic curve over $\mathbf{Q}$ can be mapped rationally to the projective line without three points. What term did Grothendieck thus define in his Esquisse?
dessin d'enfant

What does ``dessin d'enfant'' mean in English?
child's drawing

Name the notes of the mensural system in order from longest to shortest.
maxima, longa, breve, semibreve, minim, semiminim, fusa, semifusa

What did the symbol for common time mean?
imperfect tempus, imperfect prolation

What is the technical term for a stringed instrument?
chordophone

What is the technical term for a wind instrument?
aerophone

What is the technical term for an instrument that produces sound by the vibration of its entire body?
idiophone

What is the technical term for a drum-like instrument?
membranophone

What reduction technique of Grothendieck is typically used for proving things about coherent sheaves on Noetherian schemes?
dévissage

What is the German name for Weierstrass's preparation theorem?
Vorbereitungssatz

What conjecture of Steinitz and Tietze says that any two triangulations of a polyhedron are combinatorially equivalent?
Hauptvermutung

What name is given to fine-grained unsplit lambskin, kidskin, or calfskin prepared especially for writing on or for binding books or the smooth writing paper that imitates it?
vellum

What is chant sometimes called when the lower notes are sustained and the higher notes are elaborated?
melismatic organum

Whose principles served as a foundation for modern Western musical notation?
Guido d'Arezzo

(1930--2005) What Soviet-Russian classical pianist was noted for his interpretations of Liszt and Rachmaninoff?
Lazar Berman

What was Coleman Hawkins's principal instrument?
tenor saxophone

Who composed Frauenliebe und Leben?
Schumann

Who wrote the music for The threepenny opera?
Kurt Weill

Who composed the poem ``General William Booth enters into heaven''?
Vachel Lindsay

Who wrote the musical setting to Vachel Lindsay's ``General William Booth enters into heaven''?
Charles Ives

Who were the members of le groupe des Six (Les Six)?
Georges Auric, Louis Durey, Arthur Honegger, Darius Milhaud, Francis Poulenc, Germaine Tailleferre

Translate ``Ein feste burg ist unser Gott.''
a mighty fortress is our God

What English canon is one of the oldest notated melodies known to man? Its name means something like, ``Summer is here.''
Sumer is icumen in

What literary noun refers to eternal existence?
eviternity

What is the Greek name for the Maritsa?
Évros

What is the Turkish name for the Maritsa?
Meriç

What river of southern Europe rises in the Rila Mountains of south-western Bulgaria and flows 480 km south to the Aegean Sea? It forms the border between Bulgaria and Greece and that between Greece and Turkey. Its ancient name is ``Hebros'' or ``Hebrus.''
Maritsa

What name was given to a kilted soldier belonging to an elite mountain infantry unit in the Greek army?
evzone

Through what years did Gregory I live?
c. 540--604

Who was the father of the Muses?
Zeus

How many Muses were there, according to Hesiod?
nine

Name the nine Muses.
Calliope, Clio, Euterpe, Erato, Melpomene, Polyhymnia, Terpsichore, Thalia, Urania

Who is the Muse of epic poetry?
Calliope

Who is the Muse of history?
Clio

Who is the Muse of lute playing and lyric poetry?
Euterpe

Of what was Erato the Muse?
lyric poetry and hymns

Who is the Muse of tragedy?
Melpomene

Who is the Muse of the art of mime?
Polyhymnia

Who is the Muse of lyric poetry and dance?
Terpsichore

Who is the Muse of comedy?
Thalia

Who is the Muse of astronomy?
Urania

With whom did Zeus create the Muses?
Mnemosyne

Suppose that a binary form of degree $2n$ can be split into a sum of powers of $n$ linear forms if and only if the invariant $\theta$ is zero. What is $\theta$?
catalecticant

What invariant is given by the determinant of a Sylvester matrix?
resultant

What is a female sheep called?
ewe

To what language group does Ewe --- the language of the Ewe people of Ghana, Togo, and Benin --- belong?
Kwa

What large jug with a wide mouth was used for carrying water?
ewer

What Latin adjective describes something done with respect to or in the interests of one side only or of an interested outside party?
ex parte

Define ``exalté.''
person who is elated or impassioned

In what pretrial proceeding is the evidence to be presented at a civil trial disclosed in Canada?
examination for discovery

Define ``exanimate.''
lifeless

What skin rash accompanies a disease or fever?
exanthema

What bishop who is lower in rank than a patriarch has jurisdiction wider than the metropolitan of a diocese? The name was also given to a governor of a distant province under the Byzantine emperors.
exarch

What was King Arthur's sword called?
Excalibur

What tax is levied on certain goods and commodities produced or sold within a country and on licences granted for certain activities?
excise

What is an exco?
group of people appointed or elected as the decision-making body of an organization

What verb means either ``damage or remove part of the surface of the skin'' or ``criticize someone severely''?
excoriate

Define ``exculpate.''
show or declare that someone is not guilty of wrongdoing

What is an excursus?
detailed discussion of a particular point in a book, usually in an appendix

For what does ``fppf'' stand?
fidèlement plate de présentation finie

For what does ``fpqc'' stand?
fidèlement plate et quasi-compacte

What are the first six involution numbers (telephone numbers)?
1, 1, 2, 4, 10, 26

What is obtained from filling in a diagram of the same name that represents a particular partition of a natural number with elements of a totally-ordered set?
Young tableau

What construction defines an equivalence relation on skew tableaux, whereby two tableaux are equivalent if and only if one can be ``slid'' into the other?
jeu de taquin

What does Mr. VanParys say you should never burn, referencing the carcinogenic properties of benzene?
styrofoam

What is the formal name for a pickup note?
anacrusis

When did Bach exit?
28 July 1750

When was Bach born?
31 March 1685

Define ``lacunary.''
having gaps or missing portions

Who introduced the theory of sheaves circa 1950?
Jean Leray

Translate ``faisceau'' from French.
sheaf

What is the complete surgical removal of a body organ, especially the eyeball and other contents of the eye socket, usually in cases of malignant cancer?
exenteration

What is a formal term for funeral rites or obsequies?
exequy

What is the small space or inscription below the principal emblem on a coin or medal called?
exergue

What did the Romans call Exeter?
Isca

Define ``exiguous.''
very small in size or amount

What is the custom of marrying outside a community, clan, or tribe?
exogamy

What name is shared between a segment of a DNA or RNA molecule containing information coding for a protein or peptide sequence and each of the four officers acting as commanders of the Yeomen of the Guard?
exon

For what is ``exophthalmic goitre'' another term?
Graves's disease

What is the medical term for the abnormal protrusion of the eyeball or eyeballs?
exophthalmos

What is the fact, thing, or expression that is to be explained or explicated called?
explicandum

What is the explanation or explication given for a fact, thing, or expression called?
explicans

Who invented the term ``Exploratorium''?
Frank Oppenheimer

In what phenomenon or process is there rapid and sustained falling of barometric pressure in the centre of a low-pressure system, indicative of its strengthening into a mighty storm?
explosive cyclogenesis

What verb means ``drain of blood''?
exsanguinate

Define ``extempore.''
spoken or done without preparation

What does ``XML'' abbreviate?
Extensible Markup Language

What name is given to a muscle whose contraction extends or straightens a limb or other part of the body?
extensor

What verb, which typically has the definition ``lessen or try to lessen the seriousness or extent of by making partial excuses,'' can also mean ``make someone thin'' in a literary setting?
extenuate

Define ``extemporaneous.''
spoken or done without preparation

What's a mass of cells and fluid that has seeped out of blood vessels or an organ, especially in inflammation, called?
exudate

Where are the Exuma Cays?
Bahamas

Define ``exuviate.''
shed a skin or shell

What is Australia's largest salt lake?
Lake Eyre

(1916--97) What German-born British psychologist was noted for his strong criticism of Freudian psychoanalysis and for his ideas concerning the assessment of intelligence and personality (published in Race, intelligence, and education, 1971)?
Hans Eysenck

(1892--1957) What Italian-born American opera singer performed with the Metropolitan Opera from 1926 until 1948 and was responsible for the return of Mozart's operas to the Met repertory? In 1949, this bass appeared on Broadway in South Pacific.
Ezio Pinza

(1727--95) What American scholar, teacher, lawyer, and Congregational minister in Newport, Rhode Island (1755--86) was the president of Yale College (1778--95) and a founder of Rhode Island College (later Brown University) in 1764?
Ezra Stiles

To whom did Bach dedicate his Musical offering?
Frederick the Great

What musical ending is known as ``the sixteenth-century cadence''? Its name means ``true close.''
clausula vera

Where was Handel's Messiah first performed?
Dublin

Who put Paul McCartney's musical ideas to paper?
George Martin

What is the voice type of Boris Godunov in Mussorgsky's opera?
bass

What wind instrument is considered to be a predecessor of the oboe?
shawm

What brass instrument is considered to be a predecessor of the trombone?
sackbutt

When did Christopher Columbus sail the ocean blue?
1492

Complete this phrase: ``A gentleman is a man who can play the [---] but chooses not to.''
bagpipes

What rhythm and blues group recorded ``My Girl'' in 1964?
The temptations

What cap with a frustum-like shape is worn often by Muslim men in Indonesia?
songkok

Where was Louis Andriessen born?
Utrecht

What is the highest, most strongly ionized region of the ionosphere?
F-layer

What intricate Easter egg did a man of the same name make for Tsar Alexander III and other royal households?
Fabergé egg

What organization of socialists aims to achieve socialism by gradual rather than revolutionary means?
Fabian Society

(d. 203 BC) What Roman general and statesman successfully pursued a strategy of caution and delay to wear down the Carthaginian invaders after Hannibal's defeat of the Roman army at Cannae in 216 BC? This earned him his nickname, ``[---] Cunctator,'' which means ``delayer.''
Fabius

What is a fabliau?
metrical tale, typically a bawdily humorous one, of a type found chiefly in early French poetry

(1823--1915) What French entomologist became well known for his meticulous observations of insect behaviour, notably the life cycles of dung beetles, oil beetles, and solitary bees and wasps?
Jean Henri Fabre

(1745--1808) What Danish entomologist studied for two years under Linnaeus and named and described some 10,000 new insect species?
Johann Christian Fabricius

What interferometer that incorporates an etalon is used chiefly in astronomy?
Fabry--Pérot interferometer

Define ``facture.''
the quality of the execution of a painting; an artist's characteristic handling of the paint

Identify the name of the bright granular structure on the Sun's surface that is slightly hotter or cooler than the surrounding photosphere.
facula

What society constitutes the Scottish Bar?
Faculty of Advocates

Define ``facinorous.''
extremely wicked

What blood protein (a beta globulin) is involved in clotting? A deficiency of it causes one of the primary forms of haemophilia.
factor VIII

What Irish diacritic mark that has the form of an acute accent is placed over a vowel to indicate that the letter should be pronounced with a long sound?
fada

What's a fado?
type of popular Portuguese song, usually with a melancholy theme and accompanied by mandolins or guitars

What town in Emilia-Romagna in northern Italy gave its name to the type of pottery called faience?
Faenza

Of what grey crystalline copper-containing mineral are tetrahedrite and tennantite the typical forms?
fahlerz

What was Fahrenheit's first name?
Daniel Gabriel

What does ``fáilte!'' mean?
welcome!

What ring-shaped brooch or pin is worn to indicate that the wearer is a speaker of Irish?
fáinne

Which of the Shetland Islands lies about halfway between Orkney and the main Shetland group?
Fair Isle

What is the common name of Marasmius oreades: a small edible mushroom with a light brown cap, growing in short grass in both Eurasia and North America and often forming fairy rings?
fairy ring champignon

What was Faisalabad's name before 1979?
Lyallpur

What city was named Lyallpur until 1979?
Faisalabad

Define ``faisandé.''
affected; artificial

What miniature horse breed is named after an Argentinian breeder? Adults of this breed do not usually exceed 75 cm in height.
Falabella

What Spanish Fascist movement merged with traditional right-wing elements in 1937 to form the ruling party under General Franco? It was formally abolished in 1977.
Falange

What name is given to a member of a group of people in Ethiopia who hold the Jewish faith but use Ge'ez rather than Hebrew as a liturgical language? They were not formally recognized as Jewish until 1975, and many of them were airlifted to Israel in 1984--85 and after.
Falasha

What botanical/zoological adjective means ``curved like a sickle''?
falcate

The name of this broad, slightly curved sword with the cutting edge on the convex side comes from the Latin for ``sickle.'' What is it called?
falchion

What is the most severe form of malaria? It is caused by infection with Plasmodium [---].
falciparum

(b. 1957) What English golfer won the British Open championship in 1987, 1990, and 1992 and the United States Masters Tournament in 1989, 1990, and 1996?
Nick Faldo

In what town in central Scotland did Edward I defeat the Scots in 1298?
Falkirk

What was the Spanish name for the Falkland Islands?
Islas Malvinas

When did the Falklands war take place?
1982

(1876--1946) What Spanish composer and pianist composed the ballets Love, the magician (1915) and The three-cornered hat (1919)? The latter was produced by Diaghilev, with designs by Picasso.
Manuel de Falla

What is the error of assuming that what is true of a member of a group is true for the group as a whole?
fallacy of composition

Define ``fallalery.''
tawdry finery

What North American freshwater fish (Semotilus corporalis, family Cyprinidae) resembles the chub?
fallfish

What is the principle that propositions concerning empirical knowledge can be accepted even though they cannot be proved with certainty?
fallibilism

What is false topaz?
citrine

What Danish island south of Zealand has Denmark's most south point: Gedser Odde? It is connected to southern Zealand and Lolland by several bridges. Nykøbing --- is its principal settlement.
Falster

Who introduced the notion of groupoids?
Heinrich Brandt

What was a famulus?
assistant or servant, especially one working for a magician or scholar

What tube-dwelling marine bristle worm with a fanlike crown of filaments that are typically brightly coloured and project from the top of the tube, filtering the water for food particles, is of the families Sabellidae and Serpulidae and class Polychaeta? The peacock worm is an example of one.
fan worm

What lingua franca developed and used by the southern African mining companies is composed of frequently corrupted elements of the Nguni languages, English, and Afrikaans?
Fanakalo

To what did ``fanal'' refer?
lighthouse or beacon for guiding ships

(1911--95) What Argentinian motor-racing driver first won the world championship in 1951 and held the title from 1954 until 1957?
Juan Manuel Fangio

From where are the Fante people?
Ghana

What is a Muslim religious ascetic who lives solely on alms called?
fakir

To what is the capacitance of a capacitor in which one coulomb of charge causes a potential difference of one volt equal?
one farad

(1791--1867) What English physicist and chemist contributed significantly to the field of electromagnetism, discovering electromagnetic induction and demonstrating electromagnetic rotation (the key to the electric dynamo and motor)? He encountered the laws of electrolysis and set the foundations for the classical field theory of electromagnetic behaviour.
Michael Faraday

What earthed metal screen surrounds a piece of equipment to exclude electrostatic and electromagnetic influences? A lightning-struck car is an example of one.
Faraday cage

What is the rotation of the plane of polarization of electromagnetic waves in certain substances in a magnetic field called?
Faraday effect

What is the Faraday effect?
the rotation of the plane of polarization of electromagnetic waves in certain substances in a magnetic field

What is the quantity of electric charge carried by one mole of electrons called?
Faraday's constant

To approximately how many coulombs is Faraday's constant equal?
96,490

Whose law states that when the magnetic flux linking a circuit changes, an electromotive force is induced in the circuit proportional to the rate of change of the flux linkage?
Faraday's law

Where was Sir Mo Farah born?
Somalia

(b. 1983) What Somali-born British long-distance runner won the Olympic gold medal for both the 5,000 metres and the 10,000 metres in 2012 and again in 2016?
Sir Mo Farah

In what lively Provençal dance do the dancers join hands and wind in and out in a chain?
farandole

What might a Thai call a European or another foreigner?
farang

What Colombian guerrilla group was formed in 1964 as a Marxist movement and engaged in armed resistance to the government until 2016 when a peace treaty was signed?
FARC

What does ``FARC'' abbreviate?
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia

What is a fard in Islam?
religious obligation or duty

Define ``fardel.''
bundle or collection

What is the southernmost point of Greenland called?
Cape Farewell

What is the northernmost point of South Island, New Zealand, called? Captain James Cook named it as the last land sighted before he left for Australia in March 1770.
Cape Farewell

What name is shared between the northernmost point of South Island, New Zealand and the southernmost point of Greenland?
Cape Farewell

What is the Danish name for Cape Farewell?
Kap Farvel

What is the Italian for ``butterfly''?
farfalla

What were the first names of Wells and Fargo?
Henry, William

In what state is Faridabad?
Haryana

What name for flour or meal made of cereal grains, nuts, or starchy roots once referred to a powdery substance?
farina

What shrub or small tree (Vaccinium arboreum) with thick leathery leaves and inedible black berries is native to the south-eastern United States?
farkleberry

What bread roll of Scottish origin made of oatmeal or flour is typically triangular in shape?
farl

What was an edict issued by an Ottoman or Middle Eastern ruler called?
firman

What town in Hampshire, England, that is noted as a centre of aviation is the site of an air show held biennially?
Farnborough

What group of seventeen small islands off the coast of Northumberland is noted for its wildlife?
Farne Islands

How many islands comprise the Farne Islands?
17

In what gambling card game do players bet on the order in which cards will appear?
faro

Define ``farouche.''
sullen or shy in company

(1920--65) His defeat in the Arab-Israeli conflict of 1948, together with the general corruption of his reign, led to a military coup in 1952, masterminded by Nasser. This king of Egypt (1936--52) was forced to abdicate in favour of his infant son, Fuad.
Farouk

(1678--1707) What Irish playwright, who was a principal figure in Restoration comedy, wrote The recruiting officer (1706) and The beaux's stratagem (1707)?
George Farquhar

What is a smith who shoes horses called?
farrier

What hulled wheat, especially spelt or emmer, is typically used in salads, soups, and side dishes?
farro

What is a litter of pigs called?
farrow

What hooped petticoat or circular pad of fabric around the hips was worn under women's skirts to extend and shape them?
farthingale

In what system of training for distance runners are the terrain and pace continually varied?
fartlek

What instrument did Olivier Messaien commission someone to create for Des canyons aux étoiles . . . ? A drum with many lead pellets comprises it.
geophone

What composer invented the geophone?
Olivier Messaien

What ``wave'' instrument named after its inventor was used by Messaien in his Saint François d'Assise (Scènes Franciscaines) and his Turangalîla-Symphonie?
ondes Martenot

What is Messaien's only symphony called?
Turangalîla-Symphonie

Who conducted the premiere of Messaien's Turangalîla-Symphonie?
Leonard Bernstein

What bundle of rods with a projecting axe blade was carried by a lictor in ancient Rome as a symbol of a magistrate's power and used as an emblem of authority in Fascist Italy? The name is the plural of the Latin word for ``bundle.''
fasces

What word is shared between a separately published instalment of a book or other printed work and a bundle of structures, such as nerve or muscle fibres or conducting vessels in plants?
fascicle

What name is given to a brief spontaneous contraction affecting a small number of muscle fibres, often causing a flicker of movement under the skin? The word is also used to refer to an arrangement in bundles in biology.
fasciculation

What is the thin sheath of fibrous tissue enclosing a muscle or other organ called?
fascia

What bundle of rods or plastic pipes bound together is used in construction or military operations to fill in marshy ground or other obstacles and strengthen the sides of embankments, ditches, or trenches?
fascine

What is the infestation of a human or an animal with the liver fluke called?
fascioliasis

(1946--82) What German film director directed The bitter tears of Petra von Kant (1972) and The marriage of Maria Braun (1979)? His films dealt primarily with Germany during the Second World War and post-war West German society.
Rainer Werner Fassbinder

Do fast-twitch muscle fibres provide strength or endurance?
strength

Do slow-twitch muscle fibres provide strength or endurance?
endurance

What is a fastigium?
the apex or summit of something

How would one describe a tree or shrub that has branches more or less parallel to the main stem?
fastigiate

What rocky islet off the south-western coast of Ireland is sometimes called ``Carraig Aonair'' `lone rock' and gives its name to a famed yacht race from Cowes to Cherbourg (originally Cowes to Plymouth)?
Fastnet

What name is given to agile mouse-like rodents with hairy or bushy tails found in Africa and Eurasia? They comprise several genera and species in the family Myoxidae, and some kinds are noted for lengthy hibernation periods.
dormice

What is a Fata Morgana?
mirage

What is the most common echo sounder?
fathometer

Define ``fatidic.''
having a prophetic quality

What short first sura of the Quran is used by Muslims as an essential element of ritual prayer?
Fatiha

(c. 606--32) Who was the youngest daughter of the prophet Muhammad and the wife of the fourth caliph, Ali? The descendants of Muhammad trace their lineage through her; she is revered especially by Shiite Muslims as the mother of the imams Hasan and Husayn.
Fatima

What dynasty ruled in parts of northern Africa, Egypt, and Syria from 909 to 1171 and founded Cairo as its capital in 969?
Fatimid

What Middle Eastern salad dish consists of tomatoes, cucumber, and other vegetables together with croutons made from toasted pitta bread?
fattoush

What is a ruling on a point of Islamic law given by a recognized authority called?
fatwa

What word is used to refer to the second last thing in a series?
penultimate

What word is used to refer to the third last thing in a series?
antepenultimate

What word is used to refer to the fourth last thing in a series?
preantepenultimate

What composer did Bach succeed as Thomaskantor? Bach is said to have admired his motet ``Tristis est anima mea.''
Johann Kuhnau

On what occasion would Kuhnau's ``Tristis est anima mea'' (Matt. 26.38) be played?
Holy Thursday

Where did Dietrich Buxtehude enter the world?
Helsingborg

Who wrote the Lutheran hymn ``Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern''?
Philipp Nicolai

On what occasion would Bach's ``Wie schön leuchtet der Morgenstern'' be played? It was performed on 25 March 1725 in Leipzig.
Annunciation

On what occasion would Bach's ``Ach Gott, wie manches Herzeleid'' be played? It was performed on 14 January 1725.
second Sunday after Epiphany

Who composed the hymn ``Ach Gott, wie manches Herzeleid''?
Martin Moller

The name of this fugal composition comes from the Italian for ``search out.'' Two infamous ones appear in Bach's Musical Offering.
ricercar

What are the three names that comprise the title of Douglas Hofstadter's most famous book?
Gödel, Escher, Bach

What was Haydn's father's occupation?
wheelmaker

What was Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's father's name?
Leopold

What name is given to a Parisian suburb?
faubourg

What is the arched opening at the back of the mouth leading to the pharynx?
fauces

What name that is given to an excessively well-mannered or elaborately dressed young boy comes from a Frances Hodgson Burnett novel?
Fauntleroy

Who indited Little Lord Fauntleroy?
Frances Hodgson Burnett

What ancient Italian pastoral god, grandson of Saturn, is associated with wooded places?
Faunus

When did Fauré's Requiem premiere?
1888

Who wrote a famous novel about Dr. Faustus?
Thomas Mann

What German astronomer and necromancer --- the subject of a drama by Goethe, an opera by Gounod, and a novel by Thomas Mann --- is said to have sold his soul to the devil?
Faust

Translate ``faute de mieux.''
for lack of something better or more desirable

What wooden seat in the form of an armchair has open sides and upholstered arms? Its French name is related to that of ``faldstool.''
fauteuil

What style of painting with vivid expressionistic and non-naturalistic use of colour flourished in Paris from 1905 and, although short-lived, had an important influence on subsequent artists, especially the German expressionists? Henri Matisse was regarded as the movement's leading figure.
Fauvism

Who was the leading figure of Fauvism?
Henri Matisse

(1897--1962) What American novelist's works deal with the history and legends of the American South and have a strong sense of a society in decline? He wrote The sound and the fury (1929), As I lay dying (1930), and Absalom! Absalom! (1936) and won the Nobel Prize for Literature (1949).
William Faulkner

What is the faunal emblem of Queensland?
koala

What is the faunal emblem of New South Wales?
platypus

What is the faunal emblem of the Northern Territory?
red kangaroo

What is the faunal emblem of South Australia?
southern hairy-nosed wombat

What is the faunal emblem of Tasmania?
Tasmanian devil

What is the faunal emblem of Victoria?
Leadbeater's possum

What is the faunal emblem of Western Australia?
numbat

What is the faunal emblem of the Australian Capital Territory?
southern brush-tailed rock-wallaby

What Gospel manuscript was discovered in Berat, Albania? One codex is a Gospel handwritten in uncial majuscules from the sixth century. It represents one of the three or four oldest New Testament archetypes and is an essential reference point for the development of biblical and liturgical literature throughout the world. It was written on purple parchment.
Codex Beratinus

On what date was Aram Khachaturian born?
6 June 1903

Where did Aram Khachaturian decease?
Moscow

What is the oldest extant copy of De materia medica called?
Vienna Dioscurides

What assembly reorganized Europe following the Napoleonic Wars?
Congress of Vienna

Through what years did the Congress of Vienna happen?
1814--15

On what date was Franz Schubert born?
31 January 1797

Where did Franz Schubert die?
Vienna

How old was Franz Schubert when he deceased?
31

Who wrote the beautiful Eugenius atlas? The work is preserved in the Austrian National Library.
Laurens van der Hem

What conductor was the first to group together Bach, Beethoven, and Brahms?
Hans von Bülow

What Hungarian violinist was a collaborator of Johannes Brahms?
Joseph Joachim

On what river is Innsbruck?
Inn

Where was Håkon Austbø born?
Kongsberg

What composers wrote the F-A-E sonata?
Schumann, Brahms, Albert Dietrich

What Hungarian library was commissioned by King Matthias in Buda Castle in the second half of the 15th century? The books that were found there are located in Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Hungary, and Italy.
Bibliotheca Corviniana

What was the second movable-type book printed in the West?
Mainz Psalter

What Turkish poet was the most outstanding figure in the classical school of Turkish literature and wrote in Azerbaijani, Arabic, and Persian? A copy manuscript of his divan is maintained in Azerbaijan.
Fuzuli

What Belarusian castle complex was maintained by the Radziwiłł family from the 16th century to 1939?
Niasviž castle

Where was the Plantin press?
Antwerp

When was Universiteit Leuven founded?
1425

Who made the anti-war film Neighbours of 1952?
Norman McLaren

Who composed the opera Jenůfa?
Leoš Janáček

Where did Leoš Janáček's Jenůfa premiere?
Brno

What Bavarian town is depicted on Grandma DeSerrano's wall in painting?
Rothenburg ob der Tauber

What Rossini opera has the same storyline as Le nozze di Figaro?
The barber of Seville

``For that which I do I allow not: for what I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I. If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law that it is good. Now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good I find not. For the good that I would I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do. Now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.'' From what is this passage?
Rom. 7.15--20

``Par Lui tout a été fait.'' Translate.
All things were made by him (Jn. 1.3)

Who wrote the three Figaro plays?
Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais

Who is Jordan Peterson's father?
Walter Peterson

Of whom was Yvonne Loriod the second wife?
Olivier Messiaen

Where was the French pianist, conductor, and composer François Weigel born?
Trier, Germany

What does ``mhiof'' abbreviate?
my head is on fire

What is Hofstadter's law?
tasks will always take longer than expected, even when Hofstadter's law is taken into account

What word is shared between young deer, a light brown colour, and a verb that means ``give a servile display of exaggerated flattery or affection''?
fawn

For what is ``fay'' a literary word?
fairy

What iron-rich form of olivine occurs in many igneous rocks?
fayalite

What is a fazenda?
estate or large farm in Portugal, Brazil, and other Portuguese-speaking countries

What is the Feast of Dedication?
Chanukah

What is the Feast of Tabernacles?
Sukkot

What is the Feast of Weeks?
Shavuot

What medicine is used to reduce fever?
febrifuge

To what does the adjective ``febrile'' refer?
fever

Define ``fecundate.''
fertilize; make fruitful

What is the official name for St. Kitts and Nevis?
Federation of St. Christopher and Nevis

(1920--93) What Italian film director rose to international fame with La strada (1954), which won an Oscar for best foreign film? He also directed La dolce vita (1960): a satire on Rome's high society.
Federico Fellini

(1898--1936) This Spanish poet and playwright's works include Gypsy ballads (verse, 1928) and intense, poetic tragedies evoking the passionate emotions of Spanish life, notably Blood wedding (1933). He was killed by nationalists in the Spanish Civil War.
Federico García Lorca

What signal processing algorithm begets approximations of unknowns based on statistical noise, etc. over time? It is named after a Hungarian man.
Kálmán filter

What type of tenure in land has restrictions (entailments) regarding the line of heirs to whom it may be willed?
fee tail

What alkaline solution of copper(II) sulphate and a tartrate is used in a laboratory test for sugars?
Fehling's solution

What evergreen shrub or small tree that bears edible green fruit resembling guavas is native to tropical South America and cultivated in New Zealand for its fruit?
feijoa

What is an Irish or Scottish festival of music and dancing called? The name comes from the Irish for ``meeting'' or ``assembly.''
feis

What system is designed to promote bodily and mental efficiency and well-being by conscious analysis of neuromuscular activity via exercises that improve flexibility and coordination and increase ease and range of motion? This ``method'' is named after a Russian-born physicist and mechanical engineer.
Feldenkrais method

What abundant rock-forming mineral typically occurs as colourless or pale-coloured crystals and consists of aluminosilicates of potassium, sodium, and calcium?
feldspar

What is felicity?
happiness

(1877--1926) What Russian Bolshevik leader of Polish descent was the organizer and first head of the post-revolutionary Soviet security police (the Cheka, later the OGPU)?
Feliks Dzerzhinsky

(b. 1968) This king of Spain's (2014--) father Juan Carlos abdicated in his favour in 2014.
Felipe VI

Translate ``felix culpa.''
happy fault

What name is given to the view of Adam's sin as fortunate?
felix culpa

(1887--1966) What Dutch geophysicist devised a technique for making accurate gravity measurements with the aid of a pendulum and pioneered the use of submarines for marine gravity surveys? He located negative gravity anomalies in the deep trenches near island arcs in the Pacific, correctly interpreting them as being due to the downward buckling of the oceanic crust.
Felix Andries Vening Meinesz

To what county does Felixstowe belong?
Suffolk

What is felo de se?
suicide

What small boat used on the Nile and formerly more widely in the Mediterranean region is propelled by oars or lateen sails or both?
felucca

What historical term in law referred to a married woman?
feme covert

What was a louvre or covered opening on the roof of a kitchen or hall for ventilation or to allow smoke to escape called?
femerell

What is a rhyme between stressed syllables followed by one or more unstressed syllables called?
feminine rhyme

What is Norwegian for ``fifteen''?
femten

What prefix denotes a factor of $10^{-15}$? It comes from the Norwegian for ``fifteen.''
femto

This composer and writer studied music under Adriaan Willaert at St. Mark's in Venice, where, in 1565, he became music director. His first treatise --- the Istitutioni harmoniche of 1558 --- gives an argute account of the time's musical thinking and features his thoughts on tuning, chords, and modes that anticipated 17th- and 18th-century developments. His Dimostrationi of 1571 consists of dialogues between Willaert and four others. Censure from Vincenzo Galilei of the Florentine Camerata --- with whom he once studied --- begat his Sopplimenti of 1588. He is also known for his influence on Renaissance counterpoint.
Gioseffo Zarlino

What French composer, musical theorist, and organist is best known for his four volumes of harpsichord pieces (1706--41) that are noted for their bold harmonies and textural diversity?
Jean-Philippe Rameau

Who was Galileo's father?
Vincenzo Galilei

Of what group was Galileo's father Vincenzo a leader?
Florentine Camerata

What was Galileo's father's occupation?
music theorist

Who is credited with introducing the triad as a unit of structure? This relies on his treatise Synopsis musicae nova of 1612.
Johannes Lippius

Who wrote the Traité de l'harmonie réduite à ses principes naturels of 1722?
Jean-Phillippe Rameau

(1849--1919) What German musicologist who shares his surname with a notable mathematician is noted for his dualist theory and theory of harmonic functions in terms of the tonic, dominant, and subdominant delineated in his Vereinfachte Harmonielehre of 1893?
Hugo Riemann

(1868--1935) What music theorist studied composition with Anton Bruckner and, initially, was an accompanist? He published analyses ``on the compositions of the masters of tonal harmony,'' editing works of Bach, Handel, and Beethoven. His theoretical writings include ``Beethovens neunte Sinfonie'' of 1912 and the monumental Neue musikalische Theorien und Phantasien that covers harmony, counterpoint, and free composition. He expounded the idea that great musical compositions grow from a single idea and that their contrasting themes represent only a different aspect of this one elementary thought in his Das Meisterwerk in der Musik.
Heinrich Schenker

What type of cocktail consists of liqueurs of varying densities that form distinct layers?
pousse-café

Where was Abbé Vogler appointed court chaplain and second maestro di cappella in 1775?
Mannheim

Where did Gottfried Weber die?
Bad Kreuznach

What is the capital of Rhineland-Palatinate?
Mainz

What American music theorist held the post of Battell Professor of the Theory of Music at Yale University? He is recognized for his expertise in 20th-century atonal music and music analysis and for his influential The structure of atonal music (1973), which includes a description of the numbers that he assigned to certain pitch-class sets.
Allen Forte

Where did Pierre Boulez enter the world?
Montbrison, Loire

Who was the librettist for H. M. S. Pinafore?
W. S. Gilbert

Who wrote the music for H. M. S. Pinafore?
Arthur Sullivan

On what novel was The six million dollar man based?
Cyborg

Where did Pietro Aron enter the world?
Firenze

What ``clash'' cadence that is named after an Italian composer comes with a tonic--leading tone dissonance?
Corelli clash

On whose poems was Schoenberg's Gurrelieder written?
Jens Peter Jacobsen

Who composed Gurrelieder?
Arnold Schoenberg

What term of Wilhelm Fischer stands for the process of continuation or development of musical material, usually with reference to its melodic line, by which a short idea or motif is ``spun out'' into an entire phrase or period by such techniques as sequential treatment, intervallic transformation and even mere repetition?
fortspinnung

What technique did Schoenberg use and explain in Pierrot Lunaire?
Sprechstimme

Whose Kontra-Punkte of 1953 was written for ten instruments and described as a ``series of the most concealed and also the most conspicuous transformations and renewals''?
Karlheinz Stockhausen

Where did Karlheinz Stockhausen decease?
Kürten

Where did Stockhausen study with Messaien and Werner Meyer-Eppler?
University of Bonn

Where was Anton Webern born?
Vienna

(1925--2003) This Italian composer was an experimentalist who adopted serial, aleatory, and electronic techniques. He wrote Circles (1960), Sequenza series (1958--75), and Un Re in Ascolto (opera, 1984).
Luciano Berio

In what characteristic style of 17th-century lute music were the notes of a chord arpeggiated, not plucked simultaneously?
style brisé

(1894--1976) What American composer and music theorist held the post of Naumberg Professor of Music at Harvard University? He studied music at Harvard University and in Paris with Nadia Boulanger, Paul Dukas, and George Enescu. He taught Leonard Bernstein, Gunther Schuller, and Elliot Carter and published Principles of harmonic analysis (1933), Harmony (1941), Counterpoint (1947), and Orchestration (1955).
Walter Piston

What conductor and violinist is featured on the five lei note of Romania?
George Enescu

Where was George Enescu removed from the earth?
Paris

For what is ``fenberry'' another term?
cranberry

What's the niche in a wall south of a church's altar holding the piscina and often the credence called?
fenestella

What name's given to a small natural hole or opening, especially in a bone? The mammalian middle ear is linked by the --- ovalis to the vestibule of the inner ear, and by the --- rotunda to the cochlea.
fenestra

What monetary unit of Bosnia and Herzegovina is one hundredth of a marka? The name comes from an old monetary unit of Germany.
fening

What flat, low-lying areas of eastern England, mainly in Lincolnshire, Cambridgeshire, and Norfolk, were formerly marshland but largely drained for agriculture since the 17th century?
the Fens

What land mass in northwestern Europe comprises Scandinavia, Finland, and the adjacent area of north-eastern Russia?
Fennoscandia

What white-flowered herbaceous plant of the pea family has aromatic seeds that are used for flavouring, especially ground and used in curry powder? Its name comes from the Latin for ``Greek hay.''
fenugreek

What was a feodary?
feudal tenant

What was a feoffment?
grant of ownership of freehold property to someone

What ``iron-like'' large and dangerous pit viper is native to Central and South America?
fer de lance

What black mineral consisting of ferrous tungstate typically occurs as elongated prisms?
ferberite

(1852--1907) In 1886, this French chemist succeeded in isolating the very reactive element fluorine. In 1892, he invented the electric-arc furnace that bears his name. He won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1906.
Henri Moissan

What was Porsche's first name?
Ferdinand

What does ``Volkswagen'' mean?
people's car

What was Puskás's full name?
Puskás Ferenc

What is a feretory?
portable shrine containing the relics of a saint

Define ``ferity.''
the state or quality of being wild or savage

(1919--2021) This American poet and publisher, who is identified with San Francisco's beat movement, founded the publishing house City Lights, which produced works such as Allen Ginsberg's howl (1957). He wrote A Coney Island of the mind (1958) and Her (1960).
Lawrence Ferlinghetti

What is the chief town of Fermanagh, Northern Ireland?
Enniskillen

Of what county of Northern Ireland is Enniskillen the chief town?
Fermanagh

This unit of length equivalent to one femtometre is similar to the diameter of a proton and is named after an Italian atomic physicist.
fermi

(1881--1955) From about 1909, this French painter was associated with the cubist movement but developed a style inspired by machinery and modern technology. His works include the Contrast of forms series (1913).
Fernand Léger

What was the former name for Bioko?
Fernando Póo

For what was ``Fernando Póo'' the former name?
Bioko, Equatorial Guinea

What brown trout of a large variety occurs in large deep lakes in northwestern Europe? This ``fierce salmon'' is not distinct from Salmo trutta to some.
ferox trout

(1864--1930) What English electrical engineer was one of the pioneers of electricity generation and distribution in Britain? His chief contribution was the use of high voltages for economical transmission over a distance.
Sebastian Ziani de Ferranti

What city in northern Italy became prominent under the rule of the Este family in the 13th century?
Ferrara

What is a ferrule?
ring or cap, typically a metal one, which strengthens the end of a handle, stick, or tube and prevents it from splitting or wearing

Whose law states that Coriolis forces deflect winds and freely moving objects to the right in the northern hemisphere and to the left in the southern hemisphere?
Ferrel's law

(1912--53) What English contralto is particularly famous for her performance in 1947 of Mahler's song cycle Das Lied von der Erde?
Kathleen Ferrier

What orange crystalline compound whose molecule has a sandwich structure in which two planar cyclic hydrocarbon ligands enclose an iron atom has the chemical formula Fe(C5H5)2?
ferrocene

What unfinished opera by Ferruccio Busoni was completed by his student Philipp Jarnach?
Doktor Faust

What is the Hungarian name for the Neusieldler See?
Fertö Tó

What shallow lake in the steppe region between eastern Austria and northwestern Hungary is called ``Fertö Tó'' in Magyar?
Neusieldler See

``And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; And patience, experience; and experience, hope: And hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.'' Verses.
Rom. 5.3--5

``When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things.'' Verse.
1 Cor. 13.11

Who described the notion of modes of limited transposition in his La technique de mon langage musical?
Olivier Messiaen

Who composed My father knew Charles Ives for the San Francisco Symphony? He also wrote Nixon in China.
John Adams

What painting by Caspar David Friedrich epitomizes Romanticism?
Wanderer above the sea of fog

Who painted Wanderer above the sea of fog?
Caspar David Friedrich

From what work is Scheherezade?
Arabian nights

For how many nights did Scheherezade tell tales to Shahryār?
one thousand and one

Who composed Scheherezade?
Rimsky-Korsakov

What Frenchman was the first European to translate Les mille et une nuits `One thousand and one nights'?
Antoine Galland

Who commissioned Neuschwanstein castle?
Ludwig II

What figure of Slavic folklore steals, cooks, and eats her victims, usually children? She is the subject of the penultimate picture in Mussorgsky's Pictures at an exhibition. ``If [---] comes, don't you say anything. Be silent.''
Bába Jagá

Whose Morphology of the folk tale (1928) influenced Barthes, Levi-Strauss, and Dundes?
Vladimir Propp

What is Aarne--Thompson tale 510A?
Cinderella

What were the names of the Brothers Grimm?
Jacob, Wilhelm

What is Aarne--Thompson tale 327A?
Hansel and Gretel

What is Aarne--Thompson tale 440?
The frog king

What is Aarne--Thompson tale 510A?
Little red riding hood

What is Aarne--Thompson tale 500?
Rumpelstiltskin

What is Aarne--Thompson tale 410?
Sleeping beauty

What is Aarne--Thompson tale 709?
Snow white

Who was the architect of Neuschwanstein castle?
Eduard Riedel

How many Regards did Messiaen write?
20

Where was Slavoj Žižek born?
Ljubljana

Define ``ignominious.''
deserving or causing public disgrace or shame

What was the name shared by the two kings --- the first and second --- who founded Fès's east and west banks?
Idrīs

What heraldic term has this definition: ``an ordinary in the form of a broad horizontal stripe across the middle of the shield''?
fess

What is a point at the centre of a shield called in heraldry?
fess point

What Japanese festival is the Festival of the Dead?
Bon

What is a festoon?
chain or garland of flowers, leaves, or ribbons, hung in a curve as a decoration

Define ``Festschrift.''
collection of writings published in honour of a scholar

Translate ``champêtre.''
rural

What name for outdoor entertainment or a rural festival refers specially to one depicted in 18th-century French painting?
fête galante

What is the joint of a horse's or other quadruped's leg between the cannon bone and the pastern?
fetlock

In what transistor is most current carried along a channel whose effective resistance can be controlled by a transverse electric field?
field-effect transistor

What does ``FET'' abbreviate?
field-effect transistor

What is ribbon pasta?
fettuccine

What rifle salute is fired by soldiers on a ceremonial occasion? Each soldier fires in succession along the ranks to make a continuous sound. The name of the salute is French for ``fire of joy.''
feu de joie

What part of a European newspaper or magazine is designed to entertain the general reader?
feuilleton

Identify this dominant social system in medieval Europe: the nobility held lands from the Crown in exchange for military service, vassals were in turn tenants of the nobles, while the peasants (villeins or serfs) were obliged to live on their lord's land and give him homage, labour, and a share of the produce, notionally in exchange for military protection.
feudalism

What bushy aromatic Eurasian plant of the daisy family has feathery leaves and daisy-like flowers? It is used in herbal medicine to treat headaches, though one wouldn't be foolish to think it treats pyretic things.
feverfew

What Japanese fellow won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1965 for his contributions to QED?
Sin-Itiro Tomonaga

What flat-topped conical red hat with a black tassel on top is worn by men in some Muslim countries? This former Turkish national headdress shares its name with a Moroccan city.
fez

Which Poet Laureate (1843--1850) was succeeded by Alfred Tennyson?
William Wordsworth

Where was William Wordsworth educated?
St. John's College, Cambridge

What is Rosån?
river in Sweden

Where did mathematician Goro Shimura enter the world?
Hamamatsu

Where did Goro Shimura hold the post of Michael Henry Strater professor of mathematics?
Princeton University

Where were Manco Capac and Mama Ocllo, the founders of the Inca dynasty, sent to earth by the sun god?
Isla del Sol

What water body surrounds Isla del Sol?
Lake Titicaca

Where did Percival Lowell conjecture Pluto's existence?
Flagstaff, Arizona

What is the largest of the Solomon Islands?
Guadalcanal

Where is Guadalcanal?
Solomon Islands

What is the colour of the stove in ``The Simpsons''?
green

What city was called ``Duroliponte''?
Cambridge

Where was Zenobia queen?
Palmyra

What does fi. fa. abbreviate?
fieri facias

Translate ``fieri facias.''
cause it to be done

What was a fiacre?
small four-wheeled carriage for public hire

What name is given to the development of a bishop by moving it one square to a long diagonal of the board?
fianchetto

What's a fibril?
small or slender fibre

What insoluble protein created from fibrinogen during the clotting of blood forms a fibrous mesh that impedes the flow of blood?
fibrin

From what soluble protein present in blood plasma is fibrin produced by the action of the enzyme thrombin?
fibrinogen

What protein is the chief constituent of silk and spider webs?
fibroin

For what is ``fibrolite'' another term?
sillimanite

What is a ficelle?
small, very narrow loaf of French bread

(1762--1814) What German philosopher and student of Kant postulated that the ego is the basic reality, and the world is posited by the ego in defining and delimiting itself?
Johann Gottlieb Fichte

What small triangular shawl is worn around a woman's shoulders and neck?
fichu

What is the largest and best known of several companies that provide software for calculating a person's credit score?
Fair Isaac Corporation

What tree, shrub, or climbing plant of a large genus includes the figs and the rubber plant? They grow in tropical and warm climates, and several species are of commercial importance.
ficus

Identify the name of the sailor's Elysium, traditionally a place of wine, women, and song.
Fiddler's Green

What does ``fido'' mean in Latin?
I trust

What name for a faithful friend or devoted follower is derived from the name of Aeneas's friend?
fidus Achates

Complete the phrase: ``he [---] while Rome burns.''
fiddles

Complete the phrase: ``he fiddles while [---] burns.''
Rome

(1894--1979) What conductor and accomplished violist played with the Boston Symphony Orchestra (1915--30) and, from 1930 to 1974, conducted the Boston Pops Orchestra?
Arthur Fiedler

What's a fief?
estate of land, especially one held on condition of feudal service

(1707--54) What English novelist provoked the introduction of censorship in theatres with his political satire The historical register for 1736? After this, he turned to write picaresque novels, notably Joseph Andrews (1742) and Tom Jones (1749).
Henry Fielding

What is a fieri facias?
writ to a sheriff for executing a judgment

For what is ``consumption'' a dated term?
tuberculosis

Who composed La bohème?
Puccini

Translate ``che gelida manina.''
how cold your little hand is

Who sings ``Che gelida manina''?
Rodolfo

Who composed Ma mère l'oye?
Ravel

How does one say ``goose'' in French?
oie

Who sing the flower duet ``Sous le dôme épais'' in Lakmé?
Lakmé, Mallika

What is the name of the habanera from Carmen?
``L'amour est un oiseau rebelle''

Translate ``verklärte Nacht.''
transfigured night

What are the French equivalents of quotation marks called?
guillemets

What is a ``vertically-organized statement of the octatonic scale as two diminished seventh chords''?
alpha chord

What is the second mode of limited transposition?
octatonic

What chord with Forte number 4--22A is connected with Steely Dan?
mu chord

What augmented sixth chord has Forte number 4--25?
French sixth

What chord with Forte number 5-z17 is named after a piece by Schoenberg in which it is found?
Farben chord

Translate ``Farben.''
colours

What scale standard in Japanese music has Forte number 5--20B and is also called the ``Sakura pentatonic scale''?
in scale

What chord (0, 3, 6, 9, 11) with Forte number 5--31B can be created by adding a diminished octave to a diminished seventh chord?
beta chord

What chord (0, 3, 6, 8, 11) with Forte number 5--32A can be considered a major-minor minor seventh chord and is related to the Elektra chord?
gamma chord

What is a hexachord?
musical scale of six notes with a half step between the third and fourth

What chord has Forte number 6-Z11? It is a musical cryptogram of its eponym, for whom Rostropovich wrote 12 Hommages.
Sacher hexachord

What chord has Forte number 6--20 and is named after a piece by Schoenberg in which it is found?
``Ode to Napoleon'' hexachord

What chord with Forte number 6-z29 is named after an English composer who used it?
Bridge chord

What chord with Forte number 6--30B was used by Igor Stravinsky in the ballet after which the device is named? It consists of two major triads a tritone apart.
Petrushka chord

What chord with Forte number 6--34A is also called the Prometheus chord? It was used by Scriabin, who called it the ``chord of pleroma.''
mystic chord

What chord has the Forte number 3--5?
Viennese trichord

What augmented sixth chord has the Forte number 3--8A?
Italian sixth

What is the Forte number of Schoenberg's hexachord---cryptographically, ``EsCHBEG''?
6-z44

``And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things: and as iron that breaketh all these, shall it break in pieces and bruise. And whereas thou sawest the feet and toes, part of potters' clay, and part of iron, the kingdom shall be divided; but there shall be in it of the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest the iron mixed with miry clay. And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken. And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men: but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay. And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.'' Verses.
Dan. 2.40--44

What ordinal republican regime was established in France with Charles de Gaulle's introduction of a new constitution in 1958?
Fifth Republic

What amendment to the US Constitution contains a number of provisions relating to criminal law, including guarantees of due process and of the right to refuse to answer questions to avoid incriminating oneself?
Fifth Amendment

``And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed [---] together, and made themselves aprons'' (Gen. 3.7).
fig leaves

How many verses does Deuteronomy 31 have?
30

Define ``fricative.''
consonant made by the friction of breath in a narrow opening, producing a turbulent air flow

Define ``nothogenus.''
genus denoting a hybrid or cross

Define ``paunch.''
large or protruding abdomen or stomach; thick strong mat used to give protection from chafing on a mast or spar

What cape of North Carolina is located in the Outer Banks?
Cape Hatteras

What hook-shaped peninsula characterizes Massachusetts?
Cape Cod

Who built the Spruce Goose?
Howard Hughes

What was the Spruce Goose's name?
Hughes H-4 Hercules

Whom did Winston Churchill succeed as Prime Minister?
Neville Chamberlain

How tall is a tennis net at the centre of the court?
3 feet

Who is the 7th president of Indonesia (2014--)?
Joko Widodo

What are the cardinal virtues? Marcus Aurelius called them the ``touchstones of goodness.''
fortitude, justice, prudence, temperance

What is the genus of the Conway knot?
3

What mathematician described the sliceness of the Conway knot?
Lisa Piccirillo

What genus-2 knot is a mutation of the Conway knot and has the same Alexander polynomial as the unknot?
Kinoshita--Terasaka knot

What is the trivial knot called?
unknot

What knot theorist whom Michael Barratt advised teaches at the University of Tenessee, Knoxville, and proved the Tait conjectures?
Morwen Thistlethwaite

Where was Ronaldo born?
Rio de Janeiro

How many Champions League titles has Cristiano Ronaldo won?
5

How many Champions League titles has Leo Messi won?
4

How many goals did Leo Messi score in 2012?
91

What endorheic lake, whose name means ``warm lake'' in Kyrgyz, is the world's second-largest saline lake?
Issyk-Kul

What archipelago that stretches from Kamchatka to Hokkaido was initially inhabited by the Ainu? Vegetation ranges from tundra on the northern islands to dense forest on the larger southern islands.
Kuril Islands

What set of agreements involved the cessation of the Kuril Islands to the Soviet Union?
Yalta agreements

What is the highest point of the Kuril Islands?
Alaid

Who wrote that ``Mahler antizipiert schreckhaft das Kommende mit vergangenen Mitteln''?
Theodor Adorno

Translate ``à la poursuite des champs.''
pursuing stacks

What does ``qqn'' abbreviate?
quelqu'un

Translate ``mise à jour.''
update

Translate ``approfondir.''
deepen

What is David Mumford's alma mater?
Harvard University

Who advised David Mumford?
Oscar Zariski

Translate ``die forelle.''
the trout

To what patron did Tchaikovsky dedicate his fourth symphony?
Nadezhda von Meck

What Shakespearean character exclaims ``a plague o' both your houses!'' after exiting at the sword of Tybalt?
Mercutio

To whose poem did Schubert set Die forelle?
Christian Friedrich Daniel Schubart

What movement of Stravinsky's Rite of spring is composed around the infamous E flat--dominant over F flat polychord?
Les augures printaniers `Augurs of spring'

What Japanese region, whose capital is Sendai, gives its name to Grothendieck's ``Sur quelques points d'algèbre homologique''?
Tohoku

Where did Oliver Heaviside enter the world?
Camden Town

What pair of mathematicians proved the going-up theorem?
Cohen, Seidenberg

About whom was Messaien's only opera?
St. Francis of Assisi

What was Alban Berg's first opera?
Wozzeck

Where did Pierre Boulez exit the world? He held his first conducting post here.
Baden-Baden

Who founded the Domaine musical?
Pierre Boulez

Who composed . . . explosante fixe . . . ?
Pierre Boulez

What French term refers to the turn of a century or the end of an era?
fin de siècle

How many Grand Slams has Novak Djokovic won?
24

What is Easter Island's native name?
Rapa Nui

What language is spoken on Easter Island?
Rapa Nui

What language is spoken on Rapa Nui?
Rapa Nui

What is Easter Island's name in Rapa Nui?
Rapa Nui

On what date was Abe Shinzo assassinated?
8 July 2022

What is more useful when it is broken?
egg

What opera by Sergei Prokofiev debuted in Chicago and is noted for its march?
The love for three oranges

What is the only known composition of Longus?
Daphnis and Chloe

Where did Nikolai Kapustin exit the world?
Moscow

Who taught Vladimir Horowitz and Simon Barere?
Felix Blumenfeld

Who conducted the Paris premiere of Boris Godunov?
Felix Blumenfeld

What is the type of the metric tensor?
(0,2)

What is the type of the Riemann curvature tensor?
(3,1)

What is the vacuum Einstein field equation?
$$ R_{\mu\nu} = 0 $$

Whose separation ansatz was critical in the proof of a result of Finster, Kamran, Smoller, and Yau (2003) that states that a Dirac particle either falls into the black hole or escapes to infinity?
Chandrasekhar

What metric describes a charged, rotating black hole?
Kerr--Newman metric

Where did Jacques Tits enter the world?
Uccle, Belgium

What is the order of the Tits group?
$2^{11}\cdot 3^3\cdot 5^2\cdot 13 = 17971200$

On what date was John Nash born?
13 June 1928

What theory of political evolution states that monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy devolve into tyranny, oligarchy, and ochlocracy?
anacyclosis

Who talked about ``bounded rationality''?
Herbert Simon

What matrix is symmetric and negative semidefinite given certain smoothness conditions on its utility function? It shares its name with an equation that describes a substitution effect and an income effect.
Slutsky matrix

What is the better-known term for ``Walrasian equilibrium''?
competitive equilibrium

Who ideated the metaphor of the invisible hand?
Adam Smith

What two economists talked about ``difference in differences''?
Card, Krüger

Where was Susan Athey born?
Boston

Who ``reminds us that the Romantics gradually displaced the old Enlightenment idea of truth as something external, objective, and knowable through reason and observation, with a new vision of many truths---of truth as something internal, subjective, and knowable through personal intuition and introspection,'' according to Lawrence Schenbeck?
Richard Taruskin

Where did Richard Taruskin enter the world?
New York

What is Innigkeit?
intimacy; poignant intimacy of feeling

What was the original name for Cluj--Napoca?
Klausenburg

What is the Hungarian name for Cluj--Napoca?
Kolozsvár

What Romanian city's name was once ``Klausenburg''?
Cluj--Napoca

What Malaysian state is adjacent to Singapore?
Johor

What Malaysian city is adjacent to Singapore?
Johor Bahru

What is the capital city of Johor?
Johor Bahru

What water body separates Malaysia from Singapore?
Johor strait

Who described music as ``organized sound''?
Edgard Varèse

Who developed la musique concrète?
Pierre Schaeffer

What South Korean conductor and pianist studied piano with Maria Curcio and won joint second prize in the 1974 International Tchaikovsky Competition? He is noted for his recording of Messiaen's Turangalîla.
Chung Myung Whun

Who composed Ionisation?
Edgard Varèse

Who composed Music for a summer evening?
George Crumb

Where was the premiere of Crumb's An idyll for the misbegotten?
Toronto

With whom did Aaron Copland famously study in Paris? Her other students include Daniel Barenboim, John Eliot Gardiner, Philip Glass, and Astor Piazzolla.
Nadia Boulanger

Where was Daniel Barenboim born?
Buenos Aires

Who commissioned Appalachian spring?
Martha Graham

What does ``FIFO'' abbreviate?
first in, first out

What chord that appears at the beginning of a Wagner music drama has the Forte number 4--27, consisting of F, B, D-sharp, and G-sharp?
Tristan chord

In what ballet posture are the feet turned outward, one immediately in front of but touching the other so that the toe of the back foot just protrudes beyond the heel of the front foot?
fifth position

What is the golden wedding?
fiftieth anniversary

To what family do figs belong?
Moraceae

Define ``figura.''
person or thing representing or symbolizing a fact or ideal

What is the figwort family?
Scrophulariaceae

Who visited Fiji first?
Abel Tasman

When did Abel Tasman first visit Fiji?
1643

During what break from activity do people drink coffee, eat cakes or other light snacks, and relax with others in Sweden?
fika

What ``f''-term refers to a kilt?
filibeg

Define ``filigree.''
ornamental work, especially of fine wire of gold, silver, or copper, applied chiefly to gold and silver surfaces

What threadlike parasitic nematode worm is transmitted by biting flies and mosquitoes, causing filariasis and related diseases?
filaria

What is the common name of Corylus maxima?
giant filbert

What does ``FTP'' abbreviate?
file transfer protocol

What name is attributed to an action such as a prolonged speech that obstructs progress in a legislative assembly while not technically contravening the required procedures?
filibuster

Who is killed in filicide?
son/daughter

What class of pteridophyte plants comprises the ferns?
Filicopsida

What word was inserted in the Western version of the Nicene Creed to assert the doctrine of the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son as well as from the Father, which is not admitted by the Eastern Church? It was one of the central issues in the Great Schism of 1054.
Filioque

When did Brunelleschi begin working on the dome of the Florence Cathedral?
1420

What is a young female horse --- especially one less than four years old --- called?
filly

What long, slender, tapering pseudopodium is found in some protozoans and embryonic cells? Its name comes from the Latin ``thread'' plus ``podium.''
filopodium

Define ``filoselle.''
floss silk, or silk thread resembling this, used in embroidery

Where was Stromae born?
Etterbeek

Whose film infamously depicts the assassination of JFK?
Zapruder

Where was Hawksley Workman born?
Huntsville

Who said that ``Wagner's art is diseased''?
Nietzche

Who are Harry Potter's parents?
James, Lily

What tree produces acorns?
oak

Where does Robin Hood live?
Sherwood forest

How many pockets does a snooker table have?
6

``Whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake.'' Verse.
Tit. 1.11

``Behold now behemoth, which I made with thee; he eateth grass as an ox. Lo now, his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the navel of his belly. He moveth his tail like a cedar: the sinews of his stones are wrapped together. His bones are as strong pieces of brass; his bones are like bars of iron. He is the chief of the ways of God: he that made him can make his sword to approach unto him. Surely the mountains bring him forth food, where all the beasts of the field play. He lieth under the shady trees, in the covert of the reed, and fens.'' Identify the book.
Job

Who painted Ecce quasi filius hominis in nubibus us caeli (Ezekiel 1.4)?
Salvador Dalí

What is the name of Beethoven's twenty-first piano sonata?
Waldstein

Where was Leonard Bernstein born?
Lawrence, Massachusetts

Where did Bernstein enrol after graduating from Harvard University?
Curtis Institute of Music

Whose debut album was called ``Tubular bells''?
Mike Oldfield

Who composed Eugene Onegin?
Alexander Pushkin

How many movements comprise Messiaen's Turangalîla?
10

What story bases Messiaen's Turangalîla?
Tristan und Isolde

Whose last words were ``I shall hear in Heaven''?
Beethoven

``How big it is --- quite wild! enough to bring the house about one's ears! and what must it be with all the people playing at once?'' Who said this about Beethoven's fifth symphony?
Mendelssohn

Who said, ``I love Wagner, but the music I prefer is that of a cat hung up by its tail outside a window and trying to stick to the panes of glass with its claws''?
Baudelaire

Who apparently said, ``Where words fail, music speaks''?
Hans Christian Andersen

From what is ``Not that there's anything wrong with that''?
Seinfeld

Who won the Fields Medal in 1982?
Alain Connes, William Thurston, Shing Tung Yau

Where did Alain Connes enter the world?
Draguignan

Who composed ``Short ride in a fast machine''?
John Adams

Who was Shing Tung Yau's advisor?
Shiing Shen Chern

From where did Shiing Shen Chern receive his PhD?
Universität Hamburg

Who composed ``Notjustmoreidlechatter''?
Paul Lansky

What Mexican composer is noted for his Studies for player piano?
Conlon Nancarrow

Define ``foray.''
sudden attack or incursion into enemy territory, especially to obtain something

What darshan adopts a consistent dualism of matter (prakriti) and the eternal spirit (purusha)? The two are originally separate, but in the course of evolution purusha mistakenly identifies itself with aspects of prakriti. Right knowledge consists of the ability of purusha to distinguish itself from prakriti.
Samkhya

What does ``ganita'' mean in Sanskrit?
computation

What word means ``computation'' in Sanskrit?
ganita

The flux of radiation received by an observer crossing this ``other event horizon'' along a radial time-like geodesic diverges for all physically reasonable perturbations crossing the event horizon, even including those with compact support.
Cauchy horizon

Beneath what tree of Norse mythology do serpents lie?
Yggdrasil

What French poet discussed ``dereglement de tous les sense'' in his celebrated lettres du voyant?
Arthur Rimbaud

Who wrote Les Poètes maudits?
Paul Verlaine

What is a denizen?
inhabitant or occupant of a particular place

``I ween that I hung / on the windy tree / Hung there for nights full nine / With the spear I was wounded / and offered I was / To [---], myself to myself / On the tree that none / may know / What root beneath it runs.'' Who says this?
Odin

``I ween that I hung / on the windy tree / Hung there for nights full nine / With the spear I was wounded / and offered I was / To Odin, myself to myself / On the tree that none / may know / What root beneath it runs.'' What is this tree called?
Yggdrasil

What does John 15.5 say?
I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.

``I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.'' Verse.
Jn. 15.5

What being is responsible for the creation of the universe?
demiurge

What cosmic energy that is believed to lie within everyone is pictured as a coiled serpent lying at the base of the spine?
kundalini

What constituent of every Veda speculates about the ontological connection between humanity and the cosmos?
Upanishad

What texts are called ``vedanta'' as they conclude the Vedas?
Upanishads

Who wrote Heart of darkness?
Joseph Conrad

From what text is Kurtz?
Heart of darkness

Where was Terence Tao born?
Adelaide

Where was Rob McConnell born?
London, Ontario

``And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.'' Verse.
Genesis 3.7

``And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God amongst the trees of the garden. / And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou? / And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked; and I hid myself.'' Verses.
Genesis 3.8--10

``Unto the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. / And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat of it all the days of thy life; / Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; / In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.'' Verses.
Genesis 3.16--19

``And the Lord God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for ever: Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he was taken. So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.'' Verses.
Genesis 3.22--24

Who composed ``Befiehl du deine Wege''?
Paul Gerhardt

Define ``fracas.''
noisy disturbance or quarrel; riot

What is a core sample?
roughly cylindrical piece of subsurface material removed by a special drill and brought to the surface for examination

What does ``polytehnitis kai erimospitis'' mean?
Jack of all trades, master of none

Who introduced the notion of algebraic spaces?
Michael Artin

What flavour of category is the one with the minimal number of axioms such that the snake lemma holds?
abelian category

``Who cares if you listen?'' . . . said who?
Milton Babbitt

Whose music was original before becoming aboriginal?
Stravinsky

Who composed Lucia di Lammermoor?
Gaetano Donizetti

Where did Evgeny Kissin enter the world?
Moscow

What is, informally, something that assigns a vector space to every point of something?
vector bundle

When did Messier publish his catalogue?
1774

When did Dalí paint In principio deus creavit . . . ?
1964

What is the French term for Nova Scotia?
Nouvelle-Ecosse

When did Dalí paint Allegory of spring?
1978

What does Daniel 3.23 say?
And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

``And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.'' Verse.
Daniel 3.23

``I believe art is born of `I must,' not of `I can.''' Who said this?
Schoenberg

``Painting is like a thundering collision of different worlds that are destined in and through conflict to create that new world called the work. Technically, every work of art comes into being in the same way as the cosmos --- by means of catastrophes, which ultimately create out of the cacophony of the various instruments that symphony we call the music of the spheres, the creation of the work of art is the creation of the world.'' Who said this?
Wassily Kandinsky

Who conducted the Skandalkonzert?
Schoenberg

What piece begot the fracas at the Skandalkonzert?
Five Orchestral Songs after Postcards by Peter Altenberg

When was The firebird written?
1910

When was Petrushka written?
1911

When was The rite of spring written?
1913

What does ``non compos mentis'' mean?
not of sound mind

What are the two hostile brothers?
mythological hero, eternal adversary

What are the two adversarial types in the story of the hostile brothers?
fascist, decadent

Define ``deluge.''
severe flood

Define ``paucity.''
the presence of something only in small or insufficient quantities or amounts; scarcity

What packing is demonstrated in helium crystals?
hexagonal close packing

What is the volume of the $n$-sphere?
\begin{align*}\frac{\pi^{n/2}}{(n/2)!}\end{align*}

What anatomical term refers to a series of threads or other projections resembling a fringe?
fimbria

What is the back of a boat called?
stern

What is the front of a boat called?
bow

What is the left side of a boat called?
port

What is the right side of a boat called?
starboard

What is Balaenoptera physalus?
fin whale

What was the German name for the final solution?
Endlösung

What does ``FTSE'' abbreviate?
Financial Times Stock Exchange

What is a finca?
country estate/ranch

To what family do the true finches belong?
Fringillidae

What type of alcohol is fine champagne?
brandy

From what cru does more than half of fine champagne come?
Grande Champagne

What major political party of the Republic of Ireland has advocated the concept of a united Ireland achieved peacefully? It was founded in 1923 as Cumann na nGaedheal and changed its name in 1933. Its name means ``tribe of Gaels.''
Fine Gael

What are the two major political parties of the Republic of Ireland?
Fianna Fáil, Fine Gael

What noun with the definition ``expensive or ostentatious clothes or decoration'' once referred to a hearth where pig iron was converted into wrought iron?
finery

Complete the proverb: ``Fine words butter no [---].'' It means ``nothing is achieved by empty promises or flattery.''
parsnips

What is the finfoot family? A finfoot is a grebe-like waterbird with a long bill, neck, and tail and lobed feet.
Heliornithidae

What character in an epic poem by the Scottish poet James Macpherson (1736--96) was based on the legendary Irish hero Finn MacCool but fictionally transformed and depicted as fighting both the Norse invaders and the Romans from an invented kingdom in northwestern Scotland?
Fingal

What cave on the island of Staffa in the Inner Hebrides is noted for the clustered basaltic pillars that form its cliffs? It is said to have inspired Mendelssohn's overture The Hebrides.
Fingal's cave

What is a finger jam in climbing?
handhold formed by wedging a finger in a crack in the rock

What small silvery fish with a deep, laterally compressed body occurs in warm inshore and estuarine waters and is popular in aquaria? It comprises several species in the family Monodactylidae and genus Monodactylus.
fingerfish

What is a distinctive section or ornament at the apex of a roof, canopy, etc. on a building called?
finial

What promontory of northwestern Spain forms the westernmost point of the mainland?
Cape Finisterre

What was the shipping forecast area that was known as ``Finisterre'' renamed in 2002?
Fitzroy

What deliberately oversimplified form of generative grammar that generates sentences by working through word by word in a strictly linear fashion was used by Chomsky to illustrate the need for more complex features, such as transformations, to account adequately for real language?
finite state grammar

What do Finns call Finland?
Suomi

What is the process whereby a country is induced to favour, or refrain from opposing, the interests of a more powerful nation, despite not being politically allied to it?
Finlandization

Who was the warrior hero of a cycle of legends about a band of warriors defending Ireland? Father of the legendary Irish warrior and bard Ossian, he is supposed to have lived in the 3rd century AD.
Finn MacCool

What is haddock cured with the smoke of green wood, turf, or peat called?
finnan

What is a boot of tanned reindeer skin with the hair on the outside called? The name has its roots in Norwegian.
finnesko

(1922--2014) What English footballer played for Preston North End as a winger and won 76 caps for England between 1946 and 1958?
Sir Tom Finney

What group of Uralic languages includes Finnish, Estonian, Hungarian, and some north central Asian languages?
Finno--Ugric

What does the adjective ``finny'' mean?
relating to or resembling a fish

What is a light-coloured dry sherry called?
fino

What Italian term is another term for Florence fennel?
finocchio

What word that means ``flowering'' in Italian refers to an embellishment of a melody, primarily as improvised by an operatic singer?
fioritura

What name is given to the mouthpiece of a recorder or similar wind instrument that is blown endwise, in which a thin channel cut through a block directs a stream of air against a sharp edge? The term has been applied to various parts of this, including the block and the channel. The name might be related to the Icelandic word meaning ``horse's lip.''
fipple

What is the theory or philosophy of Islamic law, based on the teachings of the Quran and the traditions of the Prophet? The name means ``understanding'' in Arabic.
fiqh

What southeast Asian pheasant comprises three species in the genus Lophura and family Phasianidae? The male has mainly grey or blue plumage with a reddish rump.
fireback

What is a brick capable of withstanding intense heat, used primarily to line furnaces and fireplaces?
firebrick

What very small warbler related to the goldcrest has a red and orange crest and occurs mainly in Europe? Linnaeus calls it ``Regulus ignicapillus.'' It belongs to the family Sylviidae.
firecrest

What is firedamp?
methane, especially as forming an explosive mixture with air in coal mines

What is a dragon called in Germanic mythology?
firedrake

What small African songbird of the waxbill family comprises several species in the genus Lagonosticta and family Estrildidae? The male has mainly pink or reddish plumage.
firefinch

What does the family Lampyridae comprise?
fireflies

What was a firelock?
musket in which the priming is ignited by sparks

What is another term for ``pyracantha''?
firethorn

What thorny evergreen Eurasian shrub with white flowers and bright red or yellow berries is a popular ornamental? It belongs to the genus Pyracantha and family Rosaceae. It is called ``firethorn.''
pyracantha

What unit of liquid volume equal to half a kilderkin---typically 9 imperial gallons or about 41 litres?
firkin

Define ``firmament.''
the heavens or sky

What is crystalline or granular snow, particularly on the upper part of a glacier, where it has not yet been compressed into ice, called?
firn

What sweet Indian dish consists of thickened milk, dried fruit, and ground rice?
firni

Through what years did the First Boer War take place?
1880--81

Through what years did the Second Boer War take place?
1899--1902

What title did Napoleon Bonaparte hold from 1799 to 1804 when he became Emperor of France?
First Consul

What was the period of the reign of Napoleon I as emperor of the French (1804--15) called?
First Empire

Through what years did Napoleon I reign as the emperor of the French?
1804--15

What fleet of eleven ships, under Captain Arthur Phillip (1738--1814), sailed from England in 1787 carrying convicts, marines, and officials to establish a convict settlement in New South Wales?
First Fleet

How many ships comprised the First Fleet?
11

When did the First Fleet sail?
1787

In what ballet posture are the feet placed turned outwards with the heels touching?
first position

What was the First Reich?
Holy Roman Empire

What name was given to the republican regime in France from the abolition of the monarchy in 1792 until Napoleon's accession as emperor in 1804?
First Republic

Who assassinated Franz Ferdinand?
Gavrilo Princip

What society known as the Black Hand was implicated in the assassination of Franz Ferdinand?
Unification or Death

What is a first cousin once removed?
child of one's first cousin; one's parent's first cousin

What is a firth?
narrow inlet of the sea; estuary

(1890--1960) What English linguist was noted for his contributions to linguistic semantics and prosodic phonology and for his insistence on studying both speech sounds and words in context? He was a significant influence on the development of systemic grammar.
J. R. Firth

What estuary is spanned by the longest railway bridge in Britain, a structure opened in 1888 that has 85 spans and a total length of 3,553 m? Its predecessor collapsed in a gale in 1879 while a passenger train was crossing it.
Firth of Tay

This proverb is used to indicate that a task is seemingly never-ending: ``Paint the [---].''
Forth Bridge

Translate ``idioma'' from Spanish.
language

Who said, ``The noble soul has reverence for itself''?
Nietzche

``The [---] soul has reverence for itself.''
noble

Who is the ``bringer of light''?
Lucifer

Who is the ``son of the morning'' (Is. 14.12)?
Lucifer

What did Notre-Dame de Paris become in 1793?
temple of reason

Define ``panoply.''
extensive or impressive collection; complete suit of armour

Who painted Liberty Leading the People in commemoration of the July Revolution?
Eugene Delacroix

Where is Delacroix's Liberty leading the people?
Louvre

``He trusted to have equalled the Most High, / If he opposed, with ambitious aim / Against the throne and monarchy of God, / Raised impious war in Heaven.'' Identify the work.
Paradise Lost

Where was Mircea Eliade born?
Bucharest

Define ``hierophany.''
physical manifestation of the holy or sacred, serving as a spiritual eidolon for emulation or worship

Where was Northrop Frye born?
Sherbrooke

For what did Wagner commission the Wagner tuba?
Der Ring des Nibelungen

What two instruments does the Wagner tuba resemble musically?
horn, trombone

What basilica contains the Brucknerorgel?
Stift Sankt Florian

Where was Bruckner a choir boy?
Stift Sankt Florian

When did Pierre Boulez and the Wiener Philharmoniker perform Bruckner's Eighth Symphony?
1996

When did Bruckner exit the world?
1896

Where did Bruckner decease?
Vienna

Where did Sergiu Celibidache enter the world?
Roman, Romania

Who was the Generalmusikdirektor of the Münchner Philharmoniker from 1979 to 1996?
Sergiu Celibidache

Who was the Generalmusikdirektor of the Münchner Philharmoniker from 2015 to 2022?
Valery Gergiev

When did Wilhelm Furtwängler decease?
1954

What is the capacity of a ten-gallon hat?
3/4 gallons

On what date did Bedřich Smetana exit?
12 May 1884

What might Tchaikovsky's Manfred Symphony be numbered, considering the symphonies between which it was composed?
4.5

Who wrote the poem ``Manfred''?
Lord Byron

Who was Ada Lovelace's father?
Lord Byron

What modern-day city beheld the birth of Johann Nepomuk Hummel?
Bratislava

What does ``flor de Pascua'' mean in English?
poinsettia

Who founded the newspaper Pravda in 1912?
Mikhail Kalinin

What was Tver's name from 1931 to 1990?
Kalinin

``Well-fed horses do not [---].''
rampage

Frye says that ``the demonic society is a sustained and systematic parody of the divine one.'' Whose work was he referencing?
Milton's

What city is denounced in Isaiah 14?
Babylon

What city is denounced in Ezekiel 28?
Tyre

Of where is Hiram?
Tyre

Recite Isaiah 14.14.
I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High.

Who is quoted in Isaiah 14.14?
Satan

``Thou art the anointed [---] that [---]; and I have set thee so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire'' (Ezek. 28.14).
cherub, covereth

``By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I will cast thee as profane out of the mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, O [---], from the midst of the stones of fire'' (Ezek. 28.16).
covering cherub

What does Ezekiel 28.15 say?
Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.

``Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast created, till iniquity was found in thee.'' Verse.
Ezekiel 28.15

What does Luke 10.18 say?
And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven.

Define ``lascivious.''
feeling or revealing an overt sexual interest or desire

What is cupidity?
greed for money or possessions

What name is given to each of the seven entities that came from Ahura Mazdā in the Zoroastrian myth?
Amesha Spenta

How many Gathas did Zoroaster compose?
17

To whom are the Gathas attributed?
Zoroaster

Where was Semyon Bychkov born?
Leningrad

To whom is the weight-monodromy conjecture attributed?
Deligne

What does Asha represent in Zoroastrianism?
justice

What does Vohu Manah represent in Zoroastrianism?
good thought

What does Ármaiti represent in Zoroastrianism?
devotion

What does Xshathra represent in Zoroastrianism?
power

What does Haurvatāt represent in Zoroastrianism?
integrity

What does Ameretãt represent in Zoroastrianism?
immortality

Who is the father of the twin brother spirits Spenta Mainyu `beneficient spirit' and Angra Mainyu `destroying spirit'---an example of the mythic hostile brothers?
Ahura Mazdā

What do Spenta Mainyu and Angra Mainyu, Osiris and Seth, Gilgamesh and Enkidu, and Cain and Abel represent in their respective myths?
hostile brothers

What ``most particularly characterizes evil''?
voluntary willingness to do what is known to be wrong despite the capacity to understand and avoid such action (319)

Complete this quotation from Paradise Lost: ``So will fall / Hee and his faithless [---]; whose fault? / Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of mee / All he could have; I made him just and right, / sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.''
progeny

Identify the speaker: ``The spirit I, that endlessly denies. / And rightly, too; for all that comes to birth / Is fit for overthrow, as nothing worth; Wherefore the world were better sterilized; Thus all that's here as Evil recognized; Is gain to me, and downfall, ruin, sin / The very element I prosper in.''
Mephistopheles

Identify the speaker: ``Gone, to sheer Nothing, past with null made one! / What matters to our creative endless toil, / When, at a snatch, oblivion ends the coil? / `It is by-gone' --- How shall this riddle run? / As good as if things never had begun, / Yet circle back, existence to possess: / I'd rather have Eternal Emptiness.''
Mephistopheles

``Then I commended mirth, because a man hath no better thing under the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for that shall abide with him of his labour the days of his life, which God giveth him under the sun. . . . Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God now accepteth thy works. . . . Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity, which he hath given thee under the sun, all the days of thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labour which thou takest under the sun. Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest.'' From what book is this?
Ecclesiastes

What were Tolstoy's ``four means of escaping the terrible situation in which we all find ourselves''?
ignorance, epicureanism, strength and energy, weakness

What is antipathy?
deep-seated feeling of aversion

``Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so, / Let hell make crooked my mind to answer it. / I have no brother, I am like no brother: / And this word `love' which greybeards call divine, / Be resident in men like one another / And not in me: I am myself alone.'' From what work is this?
Henry VI

``Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so, / Let hell make crooked my mind to answer it. / I have no brother, I am like no brother: / And this word `love' which greybeards call divine, / Be resident in men like one another / And not in me: I am myself alone.'' Who says this?
Richard III

Complete the quotation: ``Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so, / Let hell make crooked my mind to answer it. / I have no brother, I am like no brother: / And this word `love' which [---] call divine, / Be resident in men like one another / And not in me: I am myself alone.''
greybeards

``Pride and worse [---] threw me down.''
Ambition

Complete the quotation: ``To do aught good never will be our task, / But ever to do ill our sole delight, / As being contrary to his high will / Whom we resist. If then his Providence / Out of our evil seeks to bring forth good, / Our labour must be to pervert that end, / [---]''
And out of good still to find means of evil.

What is Nietzsche's definition of ``morality''?
morality --- the idiosyncrasy of decadents, with the ulterior motive of revenging oneself against life --- successfully

What is the third and final section of the Tanakh?
Ketuvim

Who alone has reason to lie himself out of actuality?
he who suffers from it

Define ``timorous.''
showing or suffering from nervousness or a lack of confidence

``A traveller who had seen many countries and peoples and several continents was asked what human traits he had found everywhere; and he answered: men are inclined to [---].''
laziness

What is ``the simplest and most common lie''?
not doing (328)

What is the adverb ``perforce'' used to express?
necessity or inevitability

What Czech hockey icon is the eponym of an under-18 tournament?
Ivan Hlinka

In what state is Mt. Kosciusko?
New South Wales

Where can one find the artificial mound after which Mt. Kosciusko is named?
Kraków

What was the nationality of the eponym of Australia's tallest mountain?
Polish

What is 70 miles away from 70 Mile House?
Lillooet

Who penned Mere Christianity?
C. S. Lewis

Who wrote The Educated Imagination?
Northrop Frye

Define ``proscription.''
the action of forbidding something; banning

Who supposedly proved the abc conjecture in 2012?
Shinichi Mochizuki

Who advised Shinichi Mochizuki?
Gerd Faltings

What is the taxonomic name of the loriot d'Europe?
Oriolus oriolus

To whom did Jung write an answer?
Job

Who was Somalia's third president?
Siad Barre

What country did Siad Barre rule?
Somalia

What is a marabout?
Muslim holy man or hermit, especially in North Africa

``Then Judas, which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, / Saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they said, What is that to us? see thou to that. / And he cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself.'' Verses.
Matthew 27.3--5

How many pieces of silver did Judas bring to the chief priests and elders?
30

``Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. / And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.'' Verses.
Matthew 12.31--32

``Whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the [---], it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.''
Holy Ghost

``The enforcement of a wish merely ensures that the information contained in the denied experience can neither be removed from the domain of threat nor utilized for adaptive purposes.'' Author.
Jordan Peterson

What is hashish?
extract of the cannabis plant containing concentrations of the psychoactive resins

Who hosted The Vinyl Cafe?
Stuart McLean

Recount Numbers 31.17--18.
Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known man by lying with him. / But all the women children, that have not known a man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.

What Russian musical instrument, like a guitar with a triangular body, typically has three strings?
balalaika

In what modern nation were the remains of Homo floresiensis found?
Indonesia

What was René Magritte's nationality?
Belgian

Why did Bourbaki stop writing?
they discovered that Serge Lang is one person

``Å dikte er å vera / det vesle some ein vart og sleppe kvite fuglar ut i nattesvart / Å leva er å vera / det store som ein er / og stå i einsleg undring og høyre fuglar flyge inn frå ukjend verd.'' Author.
Tor Jonsson

For what is ``quaalude'' another term?
methaqualone

What is Grothendieck's prime number?
57

Where did Robert Langlands enter the world?
New Westminster, British Columbia

On what date did Grigori Perelman enter the world?
13 June 1966

How many points did Wayne Gretzky score the NHL?
2,857

Complete this list: Timothy Gowers, Maxim Kontsevich, Curtis T. McMullen, [---].
Richard Borcherds

At 27 years of age, who was the youngest person to receive the Fields Medal?
Jean-Pierre Serre

In what year did Grothendieck win the Fields Medal?
1966

Who accepted Grothendieck's Fields Medal in Moscow?
Léon Motchane

Who founded the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques?
Léon Motchane

Where is the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques?
Bures-sur-Yvette

Who accepted Grigory Margulis's Fields Medal in Helsinki?
Jacques Tits

Who called Andrew Wiles's IMU silver plaque a ``quantized Fields Medal''?
Don Zagier

Define ``cantillate.''
chant or intone a passage of religious text

Define ``bespout.''
to spout about; recite in a pompous or affected manner

Define ``declaim.''
utter or deliver words in a rhetorical or impassioned way as if to an audience

Define ``intonate.''
say or recite with little rise and fall of the pitch of the voice

Define ``sequester.''
isolate or hide away

What is the title of SGA 1?
Revêtements étales et groupe fondamental `Étale coverings and the fundamental group'

What is the title of SGA 2?
Cohomologie locale des faisceaux cohérents et théorèmes de Lefschetz locaux et globaux `Local cohomology of coherent sheaves and global and local Lefschetz theorems'

What is the title of SGA 3?
Schémas en groupes `Group schemes'

What is the title of SGA 4?
Théorie des topos et cohomologie étale des schémas `Topos theory and étale cohomology'

What is the title of SGA 4 1/2?
Cohomologie étale `Étale cohomology'

What is the title of SGA 5?
Cohomologie $\ell$-adique et fonctions $L$ `$\ell$-adic cohomology and $L$-functions'

What is the title of SGA 6?
Théorie des intersections et théorème de Riemann--Roch `Intersection theory and the Riemann--Roch theorem'

What is the title of SGA 7?
Groupes de monodromie en géométrie algébrique `Monodromy groups in algebraic geometry'

Who wrote SGA 1?
Alexander Grothendieck

Who wrote SGA 2?
Alexander Grothendieck

Who wrote SGA 3?
Michel Demazure, Alexander Grothendieck

Who wrote SGA 4?
Michael Artin, Alexander Grothendieck, Jean-Louis Verdier

Who wrote SGA 4 1/2?
Pierre Deligne

Who wrote SGA 5?
Alexander Grothendieck

Who wrote SGA 6?
Pierre Berthelot, Alexander Grothendieck, Luc Illusie

Who wrote SGA 7 I?
Alexander Grothendieck

Who wrote SGA 7 II?
Pierre Deligne, Nicholas Katz

Define ``fascicle.''
separately published instalment of a book or other printed work; bundle of structures such as nerve or muscle fibres or conducting vessels in plants

What is the ruby wedding?
40th anniversary

What adjective describes a strongly articulated voiceless consonant? It is opposed to the adjective ``lenis.''
fortis

From where does the name ``Fortran'' come?
formula translation

What number is cognate with California gold seekers?
49

When did Dick Fosbury win Olympic gold?
1968

What does ``FOSS'' abbreviate?
free and open source software

Define ``fossa.''
shallow depression or hollow

What anatomical term from the Latin for ``ditch'' refers to a shallow depression or hollow?
fossa

What large nocturnal reddish-brown catlike mammal of the civet family is found in the rainforests of Madagascar? Linneaus calls it ``Cryptoprocta ferox.''
fossa

What archaeological term refers to a long, narrow trench or excavation, especially in a fortification?
fosse

What two settlements did Fosse Way conjoin?
Axminster, Lincoln

What ancient British road ran from Axminster to Lincoln via Bath and Leicester?
Fosse Way

What zoological adjective describes a burrowing animal?
fossorial

What is Liaoning province's largest city?
Shenyang

Who invented the gyroscope?
Jean Bernard Léon Foucault

What is a pirouette performed with a circular whipping movement of the raised leg to the side called in ballet?
fouetté

To what language family does Fula belong?
Benue--Congo

What language of the Benue--Congo family functions widely as a lingua franca in West Africa?
Fula

Define ``foundry.''
workshop or factory for casting metal

What is the Lake of the Four Cantons?
Lake Lucerne

By how many cantons is Lake Lucerne surrounded?
4

By what four cantons is Lake Lucerne surrounded?
Lucerne, Nidwalden, Uri, Schwyz

What is the German name for Lake Lucerne?
Vierwaldstättersee

Translate ``Vierwaldstättersee.''
Lake Lucerne

To what genus does the four-eyed fish belong?
Anableps

Where is Shenyang?
Liaoning

What time is cognate with the marvel of Peru?
4 o'clock

For what is ``four o'clock plant'' another name?
marvel of Peru

Of what country is the tropical American herbaceous plant (Mirabilis jalapa) with fragrant trumpet-shaped flowers which open late in the afternoon the ``marvel''?
Peru

Define ``fourchette.''
thin fold of skin at the back of the vulva

What machine for making paper as a continuous sheet by draining pulp on a wire mesh belt was named after Henry and Sealy?
Fourdrinier machine

When did Joseph Fourier expire?
1830

What phrase refers to the situation in which an anchored ship's port and starboard cables are crossed?
foul hawse

What tiny depression in the retina sees the highest visual acuity?
fovea

What was the surname of the brothers who compiled the first Concise Oxford Dictionary (1911)?
Fowler

If your newborn daughter reminded you of a fox and of a grape, what would you name her?
Isabella

What forward part of a ship below the deck was traditionally used as the crew's living quarters?
forecastle

What type of rock is foyaite?
igneous

What is ``A'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
alfa

What is ``B'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
bravo

What is ``C'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
Charlie

What is ``D'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
delta

What is ``E'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
echo

What is ``F'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
foxtrot

What is ``G'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
golf

What is ``H'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
hotel

What is ``I'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
India

What is ``J'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
Juliett

What is ``K'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
kilo

What is ``L'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
Lima

What is ``M'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
Mike

What is ``N'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
November

What is ``O'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
Oscar

What is ``P'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
papa

What is ``Q'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
Quebec

What is ``R'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
Romeo

What is ``S'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
Sierra

What is ``T'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
tango

What is ``U'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
uniform

What is ``V'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
Victor

What is ``W'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
whiskey

What is ``X'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
X-ray

What is ``Y'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
Yankee

What is ``Z'' in the NATO phonetic alphabet?
Zulu

When did Peru declare independence?
28 July 1821

Define ``slavish.''
servile or submissive

What Swedish city is home to Scandinavia's largest cathedral?
Uppsala

What river flows through Uppsala?
Fyrisån

What is Plattdeutsch?
Low German

What western Philippine island is home to Puerto Princesa?
Palawan

What long, narrow island in the western Philippines separates the Sulu Sea from the South China Sea?
Palawan

Where did Kanye West enter the world?
Atlanta

In what year did Kanye West release My beautiful dark twisted fantasy?
2010

In what year did Kendrick Lamar release Damn?
2017

In what year did Kanye West release Graduation?
2007

What two things does denial of the heroic promote?
fascism, decadence

Identify the writer and the work: ``Often a mother appears beside him who apparently shows not the slightest concern that her little son should become a man, but who, with tireless and self-immolating effort, neglects nothing that might hinder him from growing up and marrying. You behold the secret conspiracy between mother and son, and how each helps the other to betray life.''
Jung, Aion (III 21 p. 11)

What is the opposite of ``schnell''?
langsam

What is the opposite of ``langsam''?
schnell

What does Mark 4.25 say?
For he that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he hath.

What does Mark 3.25 say?
And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand.

Who suggested that ``any internal state of contradiction, unrecognized, will be played out in the world as fate''?
Jung (Aion)

What does ``EBITDA'' abbreviate?
earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization

What is the oldest film festival?
Venice film festival

What prefixed title is given to an Italian monk or friar? It is an abbreviation of the Italian word for ``brother.''
Fra

(c. 1472--1517) What Italian painter and Dominican friar worked chiefly in Florence, where he was impressed and influenced by the work of Raphael?
Fra Bartolommeo

(c. 1406--69) What Italian painter was a pupil of Masaccio, whose influence can be seen in the fresco The Relaxation of the Carmelite Rule (c. 1432)? His later style is more decorative and less monumental than his early work.
Fra Filippo Lippi

What is the replacement of a simple vowel by a diphthong owing to the influence of a following sound, typically a consonant?
fracture

What small ridge of tissue supports or checks the motion of the thing to which it is attached? Examples include a fold of skin beneath the tongue or between the lip and the gum.
frenulum

(1732--1806) What French painter in the rococo style is famous for landscapes and for erotic canvases such as The progress of love (1771)?
Jean-Honoré Fragonard

A fortification with sharpened stakes projecting outward shares its name with the French word for what fruit?
strawberry

(1618--63) What Italian physicist and astronomer discovered the diffraction of light and verified Galileo's law of the uniform acceleration of falling bodies?
Francesco Maria Grimaldi

(1712--93) What Italian painter and pupil of Canaletto produced paintings of Venice notable for their free handling of light and atmosphere?
Francesco Guardi

Franche-Comté is ``a region of eastern France, in the northern foothills of the [---] mountains.''
Jura

What is Pope Francis's name?
Jorge Mario Bergoglio

(1494--1547) He was the king of France from 1515 to 1547. Much of his reign (1521--44) was spent at war with Charles V of Spain. He supported the arts and commissioned new buildings, including the Louvre.
Francis I

(1567--1622, feast day: 24 January) What French bishop and leader of the Counter-Reformation was bishop of Geneva (1602--22)? A religious order that was founded in 1859 is named after him.
St. Francis of Sales

(1824--97) What English critic and poet is known for his anthology The golden treasury of songs and lyrical poems in the English language (1861)?
Francis Turner Palgrave

(1899--1963) The work of this French composer and member of Les Six is characterized by lyricism as well as the use of idioms of popular music such as jazz and includes songs and the ballet Les Biches (1923).
Francis Poulenc

(c. 1530--90) What English politician, as Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth I, developed a spy network that gathered information about Catholic plots against Elizabeth I?
Sir Francis Walsingham

(1598--1664) This Spanish painter was the official painter to Seville from 1628. He carried out commissions for many churches and for Philip IV, for whom he painted The defence of Cadiz (1634) and the series The labours of Hercules (1634). Much of his subject matter is religious.
Francisco de Zurbarán

(1892--1975) The leader of the Nationalists in the Civil War, in 1937, this Spanish general and dictator became head of the Falange Party and proclaimed himself ``Caudillo'' `leader' of Spain. With the defeat of the republic in 1939, he took control of the government and established a dictatorship that ruled Spain until his death.
Francisco Franco

(1436--1517) What Spanish cardinal and statesman was Grand Inquisitor for Castile and Léon from 1507 to 1517? During this time, he undertook a massive campaign against heresy, having some 2,500 alleged heretics put to death.
Francisco Jiménez de Cisneros

(c. 1478--1541) What Spanish conquistador defeated the Inca empire and, in 1533, set up a puppet monarchy at Cuzco, building his own capital at Lima (1535), where he was assassinated?
Francisco Pizarro

What is element number 87?
francium

``Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn wrote One Day in the Life of [---].''
Ivan Denisovich

(1555--1628) What French poet and architect of classicism in poetic form and grammar criticized excess of emotion and ornamentation and the use of Latin and dialectal forms?
François de Malherbe

Who was France's president from 2012 to 2017?
François Hollande

(1598--1666) What French architect rebuilt part of the château of Blois, which incorporated the type of roof now named after him?
François Mansart

When was Voltaire born?
1694

(1885--1970) The stories of this French novelist, playwright, and critic show the conflicts of convention, religion, and human passions suffered by the prosperous bourgeoisie. He wrote Thérèse Desqueyroux (novel, 1927) and won the Nobel Prize for Literature (1952).
François Mauriac

Who was France's president from 1981 to 1995?
François Mitterrand

When was François Mitterrand elected president?
1981

(c. 1494--1553) The writings of this French satirist are noted for their earthy humour, their parody of medieval learning and literature, and their affirmation of humanist values. His works include Pantagruel (1532) and Gargantua (1534).
François Rabelais

(c. 1743--1803) What Haitian revolutionary leader --- one of the leaders of a rebellion (1791) that emancipated the island's slaves --- was appointed Governor General by the revolutionary government of France in 1797? In 1802, Napoleon (wishing to restore slavery) took over the island, and he died in prison in France.
Toussaint L'Ouverture

(fl. c. 1460) What French poet is best known for Le Lais or Le Petit testament (1456) and the longer, more serious Le Grand testament (1461)?
François Villon

(1641--1707) What French noblewoman was the mistress of Louis XIV from 1667 to 1679 and had seven illegitimate children by him? She subsequently fell from favour when the king became attracted to the children's governess, Madame de Maintenon.
Marquise de Montespan

What was Marquise de Montespan's name?
Françoise-Athénaïs de Rochechouart

(1635--1719) Who was the French king Louis XIV's second wife?
Marquise de Maintenon

What was Françoise Quoirez's pseudonym?
Françoise Sagan

(1935--2004) What French novelist, playwright, and short-story writer rose to fame with her first novel Bonjour Tristesse (1954)? In this and subsequent books, she examined the transitory nature of love as experienced in brief liaisons.
Françoise Sagan

What was Françoise Sagan's name?
Françoise Quoirez

What large game bird resembling a partridge, with bare skin on the head or neck, is found in Africa and southern Asia? It comprises many species in the family Phasianidae.
francolin

What is frangipane?
almond-flavoured cream or paste

(1867--1959) The ``prairie-style'' houses of this American architect revolutionized American domestic architecture. His notable buildings include the Kaufmann House, which incorporated a waterfall, in Pennsylvania (1935--39) and the Guggenheim Museum of Art in New York (1956--59).
Frank Lloyd Wright

When was Frank Sinatra born?
1915

For what film did Frank Sinatra win an Oscar?
From Here to Eternity (1953)

(b. 1936) What American painter --- a central figure in minimalism known chiefly for his series of all-black paintings --- later experimented with shaped canvases and cut-out shapes in relief?
Frank Stella

(1864--1918) What German playwright and key figure of expressionist drama scandalized contemporary German society with the explicit and sardonic portrayal of sexual awakening in The awakening of spring (1891)?
Frank Wedekind

(1907--96) What English aeronautical engineer, test pilot, and inventor of the jet aircraft engine took out the first patent for a turbojet engine in 1930? In 1941, the first flight using his jet engine was made.
Sir Frank Whittle

Who is the modern Prometheus?
Frankenstein

What river flows through Frankfurt?
Main

What is olibanum or gum olibanum?
frankincense

What aromatic gum resin obtained from an African tree is burnt as incense? This resin is got from the tree Boswellia sacra native to Somalia.
frankincense

(c. 1580--1666) What Dutch portrait and genre painter endowed his portraits with vitality, departing from conventional portraiture with works such as The banquet of the officers of the St. George Militia Company (1616) and The laughing cavalier (1624)?
Frans Hals

Who won the World Cup in 1974?
Germany

Who won the World Cup in 1990?
Germany

Who captained Germany to World Cup victory in 1974?
Franz Beckenbauer

What group of islands in the Arctic Ocean was discovered in 1873 by an Austrian expedition and annexed by the USSR in 1928?
Franz Josef Land

(1883--1924) The work of this Czech novelist who wrote in German is characterized by its portrayal of an enigmatic and nightmarish reality where the individual is perceived as lonely, perplexed, and threatened. He wrote The Metamorphosis (1917) and The Trial (1925).
Franz Kafka

(1734--1815) What Austrian physician is remembered for introducing a therapeutic technique involving hypnotism? It was bound up with his ideas about ``animal magnetism,'' however, and steeped in sensationalism.
Franz Anton Mesmer

(1806--73) What German painter painted many portraits of European royalty and aristocracy? He is resurrecting in the form of climate change.
Franz Xavier Winterhalter

Define ``frap.''
bind something tightly

What is frass?
fine powdery refuse or fragile perforated wood produced by the activity of boring insects

What is a frater?
the dining room or refectory of a monastery

What title or form of address does one use for a German-speaking woman?
Frau

What title or form of address does one use for an unmarried German-speaking woman, especially a young woman?
Fräulein

(1787--1826) What German optician and pioneer in spectroscopy observed and mapped the dark lines in the solar spectrum which result from the absorption of particular frequencies of light by elements present in the outer layers? These lines, which bear his name, are now used to determine the chemical composition of the sun and stars.
Joseph von Fraunhofer

For what is ``fraxinella'' another term?
gas plant

What port and meat-packing centre in western Uruguay is on the Argentine border?
Fray Bentos

(1854--1941) What Scottish anthropologist proposed an evolutionary theory of the development of human thought from the magical and religious to the scientific in The golden bough (1890--1915)?
Sir James George Frazer

What German king made a sustained attempt to subdue Italy and the papacy but was eventually defeated at the battle of Legnano in 1176?
Frederick I

Through what years was Frederick I Holy Roman emperor?
1152--90

Where was Frederick I defeated?
Legnano

(1861--1947) What English biochemist carried out pioneering work on ``accessory food factors'' essential to the diet, later called vitamins? He won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1929.
Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins

What king's campaigns in the War of the Austrian Succession (1740--48) and the Seven Years War (1756--63) succeeded in considerably strengthening Prussia's position? By the end of his reign, he had doubled the area of his country.
Frederick II

(1885--1962) What English aircraft designer is noted for designing the first twin-engined bomber (1915) and the Halifax heavy bombers of the Second World War?
Sir Frederick Handley Page

(1918--2013) What English biochemist determined the complete amino acid sequence of insulin in 1955 and established the entire nucleotide sequence of a viral DNA in 1977? He won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1958 and 1980.
Frederick Sanger

(1851--1917) This English explorer, naturalist, and soldier was involved in the British South Africa Company from 1890, negotiating mineral and land rights. A game reserve in Tanzania is named after him.
Frederick Courteney Selous

(1877--1956) This English physicist assisted William Ramsay in the discovery of helium and formulated a theory of isotopes. He coined the word ``isotope'' in 1913 after his work on radioactive decay. He won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry (1921).
Frederick Soddy

After whose son was Fredericton named?
George III

What is cocaine that has been purified by heating with ether and taken by inhaling the fumes or smoking the residue called?
freebase

What is the height of a ship's side between the waterline and the deck?
freeboard

What organization of French troops and volunteers in exile was formed under General de Gaulle in 1940? Based in London, the movement organized forces that opposed the Axis powers in French Equatorial Africa, Lebanon, and elsewhere and cooperated with the French Resistance.
Free French

When was the Free French formed?
1940

What is the thermodynamic quantity equivalent to the capacity of a system to do work?
free energy

What is the thermodynamic quantity equal to the enthalpy (of a system or process) minus the product of the entropy and the absolute temperature?
Gibbs free energy

What is an uncharged molecule (typically highly reactive and short-lived) having an unpaired valency electron called?
free radical

What is the capital of Free State?
Bloemfontein

What is the permanent and absolute tenure of land or property with the freedom to dispose of it at will?
freehold

What cereal food, made from unripened wheat that has been roasted and crushed into small pieces, is used primarily in Middle Eastern cooking?
freekeh

What is a hermaphrodite or imperfect sterile female calf that is the twin of a male calf whose hormones affected its development?
freemartin

When was the Grand Lodge in London formed?
1717

Many varieties of this small southern African plant of the family Iridaceae with fragrant, colourful, tubular flowers are cultivated for the cut-flower trade.
freesia

What streamlined fast-flying insectivorous bat with a projecting tail found in tropical and subtropical countries comprises several genera in the family Molossidae, including the mastiff bats and hairless bats?
free-tailed bat

(1848--1925) This German philosopher and mathematician was the founder of modern logic. He developed a logical system for the expression of mathematics. He also worked on general questions of philosophical logic and semantics and devised his influential theory of meaning based on his use of a distinction between what a linguistic term refers to and what it expresses.
Gottlob Frege

What pasta in the form of pea-sized balls is typically served with seafood in a sauce? Its name comes from the Italian for ``rub.''
fregola

What is the full name of Freiburg?
Freiburg im Breisgau

This nationalist liberation party of Mozambique was founded in 1962. After independence in 1975, it governed Mozambique as a one-party state until 1990, when a multiparty system was introduced.
Frelimo

What does ``Frelimo'' contract?
Frente de Libertação de Moçambique

What principal port of Western Australia is part of the Perth metropolitan area?
Fremantle

What was French Equatorial Africa's name until 1910?
French Congo

What former federation of French territories in west central Africa (1910--58) comprised Chad, Ubanghi Shari (now the Central African Republic), Gabon, and Middle Congo (now Congo)?
French Equatorial Africa

What is French Guiana's capital?
Cayenne

What type of meringue is made by stiffly beating egg whites and sugar at room temperature before baking?
French meringue

What type of meringue is made by beating egg whites with hot sugar syrup?
Italian meringue

What type of meringue is made by beating egg whites with sugar in a container placed over heated water, causing the egg to be partially cooked during the mixing process?
Swiss meringue

What is French Polynesia's capital?
Papeete

What territory comprises the Society Islands, the Gambier Islands, the Tuamotu Archipelago, the Tubuai Islands, and the Marquesas?
French Polynesia

What was overthrown in the French Revolution?
Bourbon monarchy

What coastal area of southeastern France that includes Nice, Cannes, Saint Tropez, and the principality of Monaco is famous for its beauty, mild climate, and fashionable resorts?
French Riviera

What was Djibouti's name until 1967?
French Somaliland

What was French Somaliland?
Djibouti

What territory comprises Adélie Land in Antarctica and the Kerguelen and Crozet archipelagos and the islands of Amsterdam and St. Paul in the southern Indian Ocean?
French Southern and Antarctic Territories

What was French Sudan?
Mali

What was Djibouti's name from 1946 to 1977?
French Territory of the Afars and Issas

What was the French Territory of the Afars and Issas?
Djibouti

What former federation of French territories in northwestern Africa (1895--1959) comprised Senegal, Mauritania, French Sudan (now Mali), Upper Volta (now Burkina Faso), Niger, French Guinea (now Guinea), Côte d'Ivoire (Ivory Coast), and Dahomey (now Benin)?
French West Africa

What is the technique of painting on dry plaster with pigments mixed in water?
secco

Define ``freshet.''
the flood of a river from heavy rain or melted snow

What is a flat lens made of a number of concentric rings to reduce spherical aberration called?
Fresnel lens

(1788--1827) What French physicist and civil engineer correctly postulated that light has a wave-like motion transverse to the direction of propagation, contrary to the longitudinal direction suggested by Christiaan Huygens and Thomas Young?
Augustin Jean Fresnel

What is a fretsaw?
saw with a narrow blade stretched vertically on a frame for cutting thin wood in patterns

Who is the god of fertility and dispenser of rain and sunshine in Scandinavia?
Frey

Of what are Kubikschach and Raumschach variants?
chess

To what country does Åland belong?
Finland

``He speaks in a language which requires no effort of the mind. And arguing with him is like walking through a desert. It's about people like that that they say: `He made the rounds of all the smithies and came home unshod.' And when they write in their obituaries: `perished tragically during the period of the cult,' this should be corrected to read: `perished comically.''' Who says this?
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn

Define ``bungle.''
carry out a task clumsily or incompetently

Identify the work: ``For whence,⁠ / But from the author of all ill, could spring / So deep a malice, to confound the race / Of mankind in one root, and Earth with Hell / To mingle and involve, done all to spite / The great Creator?''
Paradise lost (II 380--85)

``In looking at the people, we might see / that in the space twixt birth and death, / one third follow life, and one third death, / and those who merely pass from birth to death, / are also one third of those we see.'' Who says this?
Lao Tzu (Tao te ching 50)

Complete the proverb: ``The cow that died is the one that [---].''
gave twice the milk

Translate: ``Was ist das?''
What is that?

How many vertices does a tetrahedron have?
4

How many vertices does a cube have?
8

How many vertices does an octahedron have?
6

How many vertices does a dodecahedron have?
20

How many vertices does an icosahedron have?
12

How many edges does a tetrahedron have?
6

How many edges does a cube have?
12

How many edges does an octahedron have?
12

How many edges does a dodecahedron have?
30

How many edges does an icosahedron have?
30

What solid has the Schläfli symbol 3,3?
tetrahedron

What solid has the Schläfli symbol 4,3?
cube

What solid has the Schläfli symbol 3,4?
octahedron

What solid has the Schläfli symbol 5,3?
dodecahedron

What solid has the Schläfli symbol 3,5?
icosahedron

What is [ɭ]?
voiced retroflex lateral approximant

What generally benevolent but sometimes mischievous, capricious, sexually rapacious, or even murderous nature spirits are the custodians of treasures that are hidden in the earth and in the roots of trees? Kubera is an example of one.
yaksha

What is a sala?
open pavilion used as a meeting place and to give people shade

What does [ʔ] represent?
glottal stop

What is a samanera?
novice male monastic in Buddhism

What are the two great epic poems of India?
Mahabharata, Ramayana

On what island is Iaai spoken?
Ouvéa, New Caledonia

What languages are spoken on Ouvéa?
Iaai, West Uvean

From where are the Toda people?
southern India

Who wrote/gave lectures about The theology of the body?
John Paul II

From where is Liebfraumilch?
Rhine region

Who talks about the primacy of beauty, the centrality of goodness, and the ultimacy of truth?
D. C. Schindler

Who wrote Beauty and how it prepares us for truth and justice?
Elaine Scarry

Who ideated the notion of the hermeneutics of suspicion?
Paul Ricœur

Who were Ricœur's three ``masters of suspicion''?
Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud, Friedrich Nietzsche

Who wrote Phenomenology of perception?
Maurice Merleau-Ponty

``Beauty is when appearances [---] reality.''
disclose

Who wrote Saving beauty?
Han Byung Chul

Who was the founder and leading exponent of Neoplatonism?
Plotinus

``Love is the . . . realization that something other than oneself is real.'' Who says this?
Iris Murdoch

Recall Matthew 7.7--8.
Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: / For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.

``And the Lord said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he [---], shall live'' (Num. 21.8).
looketh upon it

Who wrote about Plato's critique of impure reason?
D. C. Schindler

What is an ontology?
particular theory about the nature of being or the kinds of things that have existence

Define ``ethnographic.''
relating to the scientific description of peoples and cultures with their customs, habits, and mutual differences

What bias refers to the tendency to interpret information as being part of a larger story or pattern, regardless of whether the facts actually support the entire story?
narrative bias

From where are the Kwakwaka'wakw peoples?
Vancouver Island, surrounding regions

Define the noun ``dovetail.''
joint formed by one or more tapered projections (tenons) on one piece that interlock with corresponding notches or recesses (mortises) in another

Define the adjective ``dovetail.''
fit or make fit together easily and conveniently

What projecting piece of wood is made for insertion into a mortise in another piece?
tenon

What is a hole or recess cut into a part which is designed to receive a corresponding projection (a tenon) on another part so as to join or lock the parts together?
mortise

What term refers to the self that must underlie all human thought and perception, even though nothing more can be said about it than the fact that it must be there?
transcendental ego

Who talked about Wissenschaftslehre?
Johann Gottlieb Fichte

Who talked about the pure ego?
Johann Gottlieb Fichte

What is St. Maximus's feast day?
13 August

What important ``Sufi'' philosopher wrote Fusûs al-hikam `The ringstones of the wisdoms'? ``Salman Bashier (2012) [argues] that `the story of Islamic philosophy' depicts an initial rationalistic phase and culminates with an `illuminative phase' best represented by [him]'' (Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy).
Ibn `Arabî

What is ``negative theology''?
apophaticism

Who outlined the ``problem of induction'' originally?
David Hume (A treatise of human nature 1 iii 6, An enquiry concerning human understanding iv)

What is a through line?
common or consistent element or theme shared by items in a series or by parts of a whole

What Greek philosopher is ``best known for his doctrines that things are constantly changing (universal flux), that opposites coincide (unity of opposites), and that fire is the basic material of the world'' (Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy)?
Heraclitus

What is the ``erection or bristling of hairs due to the involuntary contraction of small muscles at the base of hair follicles that occurs as a reflexive response of the sympathetic nervous system, especially to cold, shock, . . . fright,'' or awe?
piloerection

Define ``nomological.''
relating to or denoting principles that resemble laws, especially those laws of nature which are neither logically necessary nor theoretically explicable but just are so

Who talks about ``Overcoming epistemology''?
Charles Taylor

Where was the philosopher Charles Taylor born?
Montreal

What is myside bias?
people process information in a manner biased toward their own prior beliefs, opinions, and attitudes

Define ``cabal.''
secret political clique or faction

What philosopher ``developed a distinctive and controversial brand of pragmatism that expressed itself along two main axes'': A ``critical diagnosis of what [he] takes to be defining projects of modern philosophy'' and ``an attempt to show what intellectual culture might look like, once we free ourselves from the governing metaphors of mind and knowledge in which the traditional problems of epistemology and metaphysics . . . are rooted''? He wrote Philosophy and the mirror of nature. (Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy)
Richard Rorty

To what was Le Vernet home in World War II?
concentration camp

What is Shoah?
Holocaust

What southern French village sheltered thousands of Jewish people during the Shoah? Alexander Grothendieck was among the protected people.
Le Chambon sur Lignon

For what does ``qcqs'' stand?
quasi-compacte et quasi-séparé

For what does ``SQ3R'' stand?
survey, question, read, recite, review

What was Nizhny Novgorod's name from 1932 to 1991?
Gorky

Where did Konstantin Korovin exit?
Paris

``Oh why should [---] be mute and [---] dumb? / I am no baby, I, that with base prayers / I should repent the evils I have done. / Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did / Would I perform if I might have my will. / If one good deed in all my life I did, / I do repent it from my very soul.''
wrath, fury

Define ``ken.''
one's range of knowledge or understanding

On what date did Queen Elizabeth II exit?
8 September 2022

To what order does a Friar Minor belong?
Franciscan

What large Australasian honeyeater with a dark, partly naked head and a long curved bill comprises many species in the family Meliphagidae of the genus Philemon?
friarbird

From where is fricandeau cut?
leg

What type of meat is fricandeau?
veal

Define ``fricassee.''
dish of stewed or fried pieces of meat served in a thick white sauce

What unemployment exists in any economy due to people being in the process of moving from one job to another?
frictional unemployment

(1907--54) What Mexican painter is noted for her brightly coloured self-portraits, which were influenced by Mexican primitive art? She was married to Diego Rivera.
Frida Kahlo

(1861--1930) What Norwegian Arctic explorer led the first expedition to cross the Greenland ice fields in 1888? Five years later, he sailed from Siberia for the North Pole, which he failed to reach, on board the Fram.
Fridtjof Nansen

What Norwegian schooner took Fridtjof Nansen on his experimental Arctic expedition and took Roald Amundsen to the South Pole?
Fram

(1912--2006) What American economist and principal exponent of monetarism acted as a policy adviser to President Reagan from 1981 to 1989? He won the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1976.
Milton Friedman

Who painted the altarpiece Cross in the mountains (1808)?
Caspar David Friedrich

(1884--1949) What German industrial chemist won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1931?
Friedrich Bergius

Who founded the kindergarten system?
Friedrich Froebel

Who won the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1974?
Friedrich Hayek, Gunnar Myrdal

(1770--1843) Most of this German poet's poems express a romantic yearning for harmony with nature and beauty. While working as a tutor, he fell in love with his employer's wife, who is portrayed in his novel Hyperion (1797--99).
Friedrich Hölderlin

Who discovered the ring structure of benzene?
Friedrich August Kekulé

How does one say ``superman'' in German?
Übermensch

(1853--1932) What German physical chemist established physical chemistry as a separate discipline and contributed to pioneering work on catalysis, chemical affinities, and the development of a new quantitative colour theory? He won the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1909.
Wilhelm Ostwald

Whose synthesis of urea from ammonium cyanate in 1828 demonstrated that organic compounds could be made from inorganic compounds?
Friedrich Wöhler

Who was the first to isolate the elements aluminium and beryllium?
Friedrich Wöhler

What country is also called the ``Friendly Islands''?
Tonga

What is the capital of Friesland?
Leeuwarden

After whom is ``Friday'' named?
Frigga

What wife of Odin and goddess of married love and of the hearth is often identified with Freya?
Frigga

What are frijoles?
beans

What was the third month of the French Republican calendar (1793--1805)? It originally ran from 21 November to 20 December.
Frimaire

What term is assigned to a greyish-white crystalline deposit of frozen water vapour formed in clear still weather on vegetation, fences, etc.?
hoar frost

(1886--1982) What Austrian zoologist worked mainly on honeybees and showed that they perform an elaborate dance in the hive to indicate the direction and distance of food?
Karl von Frisch

Who shared the first Nobel Prize for Economics with Jan Tinbergen (1969)?
Ragnar Frisch

What is a frisée?
curly endive

What is a friseur?
hairdresser

What Italian dish made with fried beaten eggs resembles a Spanish omelette?
frittata

What is the capital of Friuli--Venezia Giulia?
Trieste

What does Frl. abbreviate?
Fräulein

Define ``adamantine.''
unbreakable

What is Mukden called today?
Shenyang

What synonym for ``vagabond'' starts with ``vag'' too?
vagrant

Larry David had a famous policy for Seinfeld in which he wanted to avoid sentimentality and moral lessons scrupulously. What four-word phrase is the quote often attributed to David as the summary of this policy?
no hugging, no learning

What is a water-englobed horse?
seahorse

Who composed L'histoire du soldat?
Stravinsky

What is the title of Dalí's ``melting clocks'' painting?
The persistence of memory

``He approached, a [---] in his mouth.''
flaming cigarette

What does Psalms 40.10 say?
I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart; I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy lovingkindness and thy truth from the great congregation.

What country's currency is FJD?
Fiji

What territory's currency is FKP?
Falkland Islands

What unit does ``fm'' abbreviate?
fathom

What element has the symbol Fm?
Fermium

What does ``FNQ'' abbreviate?
far north Queensland

(c. 1535--94) This English explorer led an unsuccessful expedition in search of the North-West Passage in 1576. He served in Sir Francis Drake's Caribbean tour of 1585--86 and played a prominent part in the defeat of the Spanish Armada.
Sir Martin Frobisher

What man's double-breasted, long-skirted coat is now worn chiefly on formal occasions?
frock coat

What is a froe?
cleaving tool with a handle at right angles to the blade

What floating freshwater plant with creeping stems that bear clusters of small rounded leaves comprises two species in the family Hydrocharitaceae: Hydrocharis morsus-ranae and Hydromystria laevigatum?
frogbit

What anglerfish typically lives on the seabed, where its warty skin and colour provide camouflage? It comprises numerous species in the families Antennariidae and Brachionichthyidae. Don't let it fool you: it is a fish.
frogfish

What nocturnal bird resembling a nightjar can one find in southeastern Asia and Australasia? It comprises two genera in the family Podargidae.
frogmouth

What is froideur?
coolness or reserve between people

Define ``frolicsome.''
lively and playful

What type of soft French cheese is made from cow's milk and has a creamy sour taste?
fromage blanc

What type of smooth, soft, fresh cheese has the consistency of thick yogurt?
fromage frais

In what French civil wars (1648--53) did the nobles rise in rebellion against Mazarin and the court during the minority of Louis XIV? The name comes from the party that revolted.
Fronde

What is frondescence?
green foliage; greenery

What is a frondeur?
political rebel

What zoological term refers to the forehead or equivalent part of an animal, especially the middle part of an insect's face between the eyes and above the clypeus?
frons

What is the plural for ``frons''?
frontes

What revolutionary political party in Algeria supported the war of independence against France (1954--62)?
Front de Libération Nationale

What does ``FLN'' abbreviate?
Front de Libération Nationale

What adverb or adverbial phrase is placed at the start of a sentence or clause --- for example, ``yesterday'' in ``yesterday I went to the park'' or ``after work'' in ``after work, she went to the park.''
fronted adverbial

Define ``frore.''
frozen; frosty

What literary adjective comes from the archaic past participle of ``freeze''?
frore

What is a frosé?
partially frozen drink made from rosé wine and fruit combined with ice and pureed into a smooth consistency

(1874--1963) This American poet is noted for his ironic tone and simple language. Much of his poetry reflects his affinity with New England, including the collections North of Boston (1914) and New Hampshire (1923). He won the Pulitzer Prize on three occasions (1924, 1931, and 1937).
Robert Frost

What is the technique or process of taking a rubbing from an uneven surface to form the basis of a work of art?
frottage

What form of Italian comic or amorous song comes from the 15th and 16th centuries? Its name means ``fib'' or ``tall story'' in Italian.
frottola

What dimensionless number used in hydrodynamics indicates how well a particular model works in relation to a natural system?
Froude number

What form of trichomoniasis affects hawks, resulting in a sore with a cheesy secretion in the mouth or throat?
frounce

From where is a frow?
Netherlands

Define ``frowsty.''
having a stale, warm, and stuffy atmosphere

What does ``FRS'' abbreviate?
Fellow of the Royal Society

What was the twelfth month of the French Republican calendar (1793--1805)? It ran from 18 August to 16 September. Its name comes from the Latin for ``fruit'' and the Greek for ``gift.''
Fructidor

Define ``fructify.''
make (something) fruitful or productive

Define ``fructuous.''
full of or producing a great deal of fruit

What is an animal that feeds on fruit called?
frugivore

What is fruit acid?
alpha-hydroxy acid

What bat with a long snout and large eyes feeds chiefly on fruit or nectar and is found mainly in the Old World tropics? It comprises numerous species in the family Pteropodidae.
fruit bat

What tropical fruit-eating dove that typically has brightly coloured plumage, usually with a green back, occurs mainly in Indonesia and Australasia? It comprises many species in the family Columbidae, specifically the genera Ptilonopus and Phapitreron.
fruit dove

What name refers to either a relative of the imperial pigeons occurring in New Guinea (genus Ducula, family Columbidae) or a green pigeon occurring in Africa (genus Treron, family Columbidae)?
fruit pigeon

What is fruit sugar?
fructose

What is fruitage?
fruit collectively

What large tropical American cotinga with mainly black or red and black plumage belongs to four genera and species in the family Cotingidae?
fruitcrow

What name is given to any of the small individual drupes forming a fleshy aggregate fruit such as a blackberry or raspberry? Sometimes, it is called a ``fruitlet.''
drupel

What small moth with typically green caterpillars lives inside rolled leaves and can be a severe pest of fruit and other trees? It comprises many species in the family Tortricidae, including Pammene rhediella, whose larvae damage apple and plum trees.
tortrix

What old-fashioned dish consists of hulled wheat boiled in milk and is seasoned with cinnamon and sugar?
frumenty

What was Bishkek's name from 1926 to 1991?
Frunze

What is the chemical formula of frusemide?
C12H11ClN2O5S

What synthetic compound with a strong diuretic action, used especially in the treatment of oedema, has the chemical formula C12H11ClN2O5S?
frusemide

What portion of a cone or pyramid remains after one cuts off its upper part by a plane parallel to its base?
frustum

What silicified cell wall of a diatom consists of two valves or overlapping halves?
frustule

What adjective describes a lichen that has ``upright or pendulous branches''?
fruticose

(1907--2005) What English playwright was known chiefly for his comic verse dramas, especially The lady's not for burning (1948) and Venus observed (1950)?
Christopher Fry

(1866--1934) What English art critic and painter argued for an aesthetic of pure form and regarded content as incidental?
Roger Fry

(1912--91) What Canadian literary critic's work explores the use of myth and symbolism? He wrote Fearful symmetry (1947), The great code: the Bible and literature (1982), The educated imagination (1962), and Words with power (1991).
Northrop Frye

What does ``FSH'' abbreviate?
follicle-stimulating hormone

What hormone secreted by the anterior pituitary gland promotes the formation of ova or sperm?
follicle-stimulating hormone

What Egyptian king (1922--36) was the sultan of Egypt (1917--22) and became Egypt's first king after independence?
Fuad I

What Egyptian king (1952--53) was named king as an infant on the forced abdication of his father, Farouk, and was deposed when Egypt became a republic?
Fuad II

(1911--88) This German-born British physicist was a communist who fled Nazi persecution. During the 1940s, he passed secret information to the USSR acquired while working on developing the atom bomb in the United States and while engaged in research in Britain.
Klaus Fuchs

(1908--99) What English geologist and explorer led the Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition (1955--58), making the first overland crossing of the Antarctic?
Sir Vivian Fuchs

What deep red synthetic dye used as a biological stain and disinfectant has the chemical formula C20H20N3Cl? It is a chloride of rosaniline.
fuchsin

What seaweed of a large genus of brown algae having flat, leathery fronds belongs to the class Phaeophyceae?
fucus

What name is given to a brown seaweed or fossil plant belonging to a group to which bladderwrack belongs?
fucoid

What brown carotenoid pigment occurs in and is generally characteristic of brown algae?
fucoxanthin

Translate ``Führer und Reichskanzler.''
Leader and Chancellor of the Empire

Define ``fugacious.''
tending to disappear; fleeting

What is the quality of being fleeting or evanescent or the thermodynamic property of a real gas that, if substituted for the pressure or partial pressure in the equations for an ideal gas, gives equations applicable to the real gas?
fugacity

What is Fuggle?
variety of hops used in beer-making

What name is given to a pufferfish that is eaten as a Japanese delicacy after some highly poisonous parts have been removed?
fugu

What musical term has the following psychiatric definition: ``a loss of awareness of one's identity, often coupled with flight from one's usual environment, associated with certain forms of hysteria and epilepsy''?
fugue

What was a soldier standing before a regiment or company to demonstrate and maintain time in drilling exercises called?
fugleman

What do the Latin roots tac--, --tic-- mean?
be silent; tacere, tacitus; reticent, tacit

What does the Greek root tach-- mean?
swift; ταχύς (tachus); tachometer, tachycardia

What does the Greek root taeni-- mean?
ribbon; ταινία (tainia); taenidium, taeniodont, Taeniolabis

What does the Latin root tal-- mean?
ankle; talus; talus bone

What do the Latin roots tang--, --ting--, tact--, tag-- mean?
touch; tangere, tactus; contact, tactile, tangent

What does the Latin root tapet-- mean?
carpet; tapete, tapetis; tapestry, tapetum, tapis

What does the Latin root tard-- mean?
slow; tardus; retard, tardigrade, tardy

What does the Greek root tars-- mean?
ankle; ταρσός (tarsos, a flat basket); tarsal

What does the Greek root taur-- mean?
bull; ταῦρος (tauros); Minotaur

What does the Latin root taur-- mean?
bull; taurus; Taurus

What does the Greek root tax-- mean?
arrangement, order; τάξις (taxis); taxonomy

What does the Greek root techn-- mean?
art, skill; τέχνη (technē); technology

What do the Latin roots teg--, tect-- mean?
cover; tegere, tectus; integument, protection

What does the Greek root tele-- mean?
far, end; τῆλε (tēle); telegram, telephone, telescope

What does the Greek root tele-- mean?
complete; τέλος (telos); teleology

What does the Greek root temn-- mean?
cut; τέμνω (temnō); Temnospondyli

What does the Latin root tempor-- mean?
time; tempus, temporis; contemporary, temporal, temporary

What do the Latin roots ten--, --tin--, tent-- mean?
hold; tenere, tentus; continent, detention, tenacious, tenor

What do the Latin roots tend--, tens-- mean?
stretch, strain; tendere, tensus; extend, extension

What does the Latin root tenu-- mean?
slender, thin; tenuis; attenuate, tenuous

What does the Latin root tep-- mean?
be warm; tepere; tepid, tepor

What do the Latin roots ter--, trit-- mean?
rub; terere, tritus; attrition, contrite, detritus, trite

What does the Latin root teret-- mean?
rounded; teres, teretis; subterete, teretial

What do the Latin roots terg--, ters-- mean?
wipe; tergere, tersus; detergent, terse

What does the Latin root termin-- mean?
boundary, limit, end; terminus; determine, terminal, termination

What does the Latin root tern-- mean?
three each; terni; ternary, ternion

What does the Latin root terr-- mean?
dry land; terra; subterranean, terrace, terracotta, terrain

What does the Latin root terti-- mean?
third; tertius; tertian, tertiary

What does the Latin root test-- mean?
witness; testis; testament, testimony

What does the Greek root tetr-- mean?
four; τέσσαρες (tessares); tetrahedron, tetrode

What do the Latin roots tex--, text-- mean?
weave; texere, textus; context, texture, textile

What does the Greek root thalam-- mean?
chamber, bed; θάλαμος (thalamos)

What does the Greek root thalass-- mean?
sea; θάλασσα (thalassa); Panthalassa

What does the Greek root than-- mean?
death; θάνατος (thanatos); euthanasia

What do the Greek roots the--, thus-- mean?
god; θεός (theos); enthusiasm, theology

What does the Greek root the-- mean?
put; τίθημι (tithēmi), θήκη (thēkē); Bibliotheca, theca, theme, thesis

What does the Greek root thel-- mean?
θηλή (thēlē)

What does the Greek root theori-- mean?
speculation; θεωρία (theōria); theorem, theory

What does the Greek root ther-- mean?
beast, animal; θήρ, θηρός (thēr); theroid, theropod

What does the Greek root therm-- mean?
heat, warm; θερμός (thermos); endotherm, thermometer

What does the Greek root thym-- mean?
mood; θυμός (thumos); dysthymia

What does the Greek root thyr-- mean?
door; θύρα (thura); thyratron

What does the Greek root thyre-- mean?
large shield; θυρεός (thureos); Thyreophora, thyroid, thyrotropin, thyroxine

What does the Latin root tim-- mean?
be afraid; timere; timid, timorous

What do the Latin roots ting--, tinct-- mean?
moisten; tingere, tinctus; tincture

What does the Greek root tom-- mean?
cut; τομή (tome), τόμος (tomos); ectomy, atom, tome

What does the Greek root ton-- mean?
stretch; τόνος (tonos); isotonic, monotone, tone

What does the Greek root top-- mean?
place; τόπος (topos); topic, topography

What does the Latin from Greek root torn-- mean?
cut; tornare < τόρνος (tornos)

What does the Latin root torpe-- mean?
numb; torpere; torpent, torpid, torpor

What do the Latin roots torqu--, tort-- mean?
twist; torquere, tortus; extortion, torque, torture

What does the Latin root tot-- mean?
all, whole; totus; subtotal, total, totality

What does the Greek root tox-- mean?
arrow, bow; τόξον (toxon)

What does the Latin root trab-- mean?
beam; trabs, trabis; trabeculae

What does the Greek root trachy-- mean?
rough; τραχύς (trachus); trachea

What does the Greek root trag-- mean?
goat; τράγος (tragos); tragus

What do the Latin roots trah--, tract-- mean?
draw, pull; trahere, tractus; subtrahend, tractor

What do the Latin roots trans--, tra--, tran-- mean?
across; trans; tradition, transcend, transportation

What does the Greek root trapez-- mean?
four--sided, table; τράπεζα (trapeza); trapezius, trapezoid

What does the Greek root traum-- mean?
wound; τραῦμα (trauma); trauma, traumatic

What does the Latin root trecent-- mean?
three hundred; trecenti; trecentennial, trecentillion

What does the Latin root tredec-- mean?
thirteen; tredecim; tredecimal

What does the Greek root treiskaidek-- mean?
thirteen; τρεισκαίδεκα (treiskaideka); triskaidekaphobia

What does the Latin root trem-- mean?
tremble; tremere; tremor

What does the Greek root trema-- mean?
hole; τρῆμα (trēma); trematode

What does the Greek root tri-- mean?
three; τρεῖς, τρία (treis, tria); triad, trigon, triode, tripod

What does the Latin root tri-- mean?
three; trēs; triangle, triumvirate, trivia

What does the Latin root tricen-- mean?
thirty each; triceni; tricenary

What do the Latin roots tricesim--, trigesim-- mean?
thirtieth; tricesimus; trigesimal

What does the Greek root trich-- mean?
hair; θρίξ, τριχός (thrix, trichos); peritrichous, trichopathophobia, Trichoptera

What does the Latin root trin-- mean?
three each; trini; trinary, trine, trinity

What does the Greek root trit-- mean?
third; τρίτος (tritos); tritagonist

What does the Greek root troch-- mean?
wheel; τροχός (trochos); trochlea

What does the Greek root trop-- mean?
turning; τρόπος (tropos); heliotropism, psychotropic, tropic

What does the Greek root troph-- mean?
feed, grow; τροφή, τροφός (trophos); dystrophy, pogonotrophy, trophic

What do the Latin roots trud--, trus-- mean?
thrust; trudere, trusus; extrusion, intrude

What does the Latin root tuss-- mean?
cough; tussis, tussire; pertussis

What does the Greek root tympan-- mean?
drum; τύμπανον (tumpanon); tympani

What does the Greek root typ-- mean?
stamp, model; τύπος (tupos); archetype, phenotype, typography

What does the Latin root uber-- mean?
fruitful; uber, uberare; exuberant

What does the Latin root uligin-- mean?
in marshes; uligo, uliginis; uliginous

What does the Latin root ulo-- mean?
wooly; Greek; ultim--; farthest; ultimus; ultimatum, ultimate

What does the Latin root ultra-- mean?
beyond; ultra; ultrasonic

What does the Latin root umbilic-- mean?
navel; umbilicus; umbilical

What does the Latin root umbr-- mean?
shade, shadow; umbra; penumbra, umbrella

What does the Latin root un-- mean?
one; unus, unius; unary, unicorn, union

What does the Latin root unc-- mean?
hooked; uncus; uncinate

What does the Latin root unci-- mean?
ounce, twelfth; uncia; uncial

What does the Latin root und-- mean?
wave; unda; abundant, undulate

What does the Latin root undecim-- mean?
eleventh; undecimus; undecimal

What does the Latin root unden-- mean?
eleven each; undeni; undenary

What does the Latin root ungui-- mean?
claw, nail; unguis

What does the Latin root ungul-- mean?
claw, hoof; ungula; ungulate

What do the Greek roots ur--, uro-- mean?
tail; οὐρά (oura); uroid, uroborus

What do the Greek roots ur--, uro-- mean?
urine; οὖρον (ouron); urology

What does the Latin root urb-- mean?
city; urbs, urbis; urban, urbanize, suburbanite, urbanism

What does the Latin root urg-- mean?
work; urgere; urgent

What does the Latin root urs-- mean?
bear; ursus; Ursa Major, ursine

What do the Latin roots ut--, us-- mean?
use; uti, usus; usual, utility

What does the Latin root uv-- mean?
grape; uva; uvea

What does the Latin root uxor-- mean?
wife; uxor; uxoricide

What does the Latin root vac-- mean?
empty; vacare; vacancy, vacation, vacuum

What do the Latin roots vad--, vas-- mean?
go; vadere; evade, pervasive

What does the Latin root vag-- mean?
wander; vagus, vagare; vagabond, vague

What does the Latin root van-- mean?
empty, vain, idle; vanus; vanity

What does the Latin root vap-- mean?
lack (of); vapor; evaporation, vapid, vaporize

What do the Latin roots veh--, vect-- mean?
carry; vehere, vectus; vehicle, vector

What does the Latin root vel-- mean?
veil; velum; revelation, velate

What do the Latin roots vell--, vuls-- mean?
pull; vellere, vulsus; convulsion

What does the Latin root veloc-- mean?
quick; velox, velocis; velocity

What does the Latin root ven-- mean?
vein; vena; venosity

What does the Latin root ven-- mean?
hunt; venari; venison

What do the Latin roots ven--, vent-- mean?
come; venire; advent, convention

What does the Latin root vend-- mean?
sell; vendere; vendor, vending

What does the Latin root vener-- mean?
respectful; venus; veneration, venereal

What does the Latin root vent-- mean?
wind; ventus; ventilation

What does the Latin root ventr-- mean?
belly; venter; ventral

What does the Latin root ver-- mean?
true; verus; aver, veracious, verify, verisimilitude, verity

What does the Latin root verb-- mean?
word; verbum; verbal, verbatim, verbosity

What does the Latin root verber-- mean?
whip; verber; reverberation

What does the Latin root verm-- mean?
worm; vermis; vermiform

What does the Latin root vern-- mean?
spring; ver, vernus; vernal

What do the Latin roots vert--, vers-- mean?
turn; vertere, versus; convert, inversion, invert, vertical

What does the Latin root vesic-- mean?
bladder; vesica; vesical

What does the Latin root vesper-- mean?
evening, western; vespera; vesperal

What does the Latin root vest-- mean?
clothe, garment; vestis; divest, vest

What does the Latin root vestig-- mean?
track; vestigium; investigate

What does the Latin root vet-- mean?
forbid; vetare; veto

What does the Latin root veter-- mean?
old; vetus, veteris; inveterate, veteran

What does the Latin root vi-- mean?
way; via; deviate, obvious, via

What does the Latin root vic-- mean?
change; vicis; vice versa, vicissitude

What do the Latin roots vicen--, vigen-- mean?
twenty; viceni; vicenary

What do the Latin roots vicesim--, vigesim-- mean?
twentieth; vicesimus; vicesimary, vicesimation, vigesimal

What do the Latin roots vid--, vis-- mean?
see; videre, visus; video, vision

What does the Latin root vil-- mean?
cheap; vilis; vile, vilify

What does the Latin root vill-- mean?
shaggy hair, velvet; villus; villiform

What does the Latin root vin-- mean?
wine; vinum; vinous

What do the Latin roots vinc--, vict-- mean?
conquer; vincere, victus; invincible, victory

What does the Latin root vir-- mean?
man; vir; virility

What does the Latin root vir-- mean?
green; virere; virid, viridian

What does the Latin root visc-- mean?
thick; viscum; viscosity

What does the Latin root viscer-- mean?
organs of the body cavity; viscus, visceris; eviscerate, visceral

What does the Latin root vit-- mean?
life; vita; vital, vitamin

What does the Latin root vitell-- mean?
yolk; vitellus; vitellogenesis

What does the Latin root viti-- mean?
fault; vitium; vice, vitiate

What does the Latin root vitr-- mean?
glass; vitrum; vitreous

What does the Latin root viv-- mean?
live; vivere; revive, survive, vivid

What does the Latin root voc-- mean?
voice; vox, vocis; provocative, vocal, vocation

What does the Latin root vol-- mean?
fly; volare; volatility

What does the Latin root vol-- mean?
wish; velle; volition

What do the Latin roots volv--, volut-- mean?
roll; volvere, volutus; convolution, revolve

What does the Latin root vom-- mean?
discharge; vomere; vomit

What do the Latin roots vor--, vorac-- mean?
swallow; vorare, vorax; devour, voracious

What do the Latin roots vov--, vot-- mean?
vow; vovere, votus; votive

What does the Latin root vulg-- mean?
common, crowd; vulgus; divulge, vulgarity, vulgate

What does the Latin root vulner-- mean?
wound; vulnus, vulneris; vulnerable

What does the Latin root vulp-- mean?
fox; vulpes, vulpis; vulpine

What does the Greek root xanth-- mean?
yellow; ξάνθος (xanthos); xanthogenic

What does the Greek root xen-- mean?
foreign; ξένος (xenos); xenophobia

What does the Greek root xer-- mean?
dry; ξηρός (xēros); xerography, xerophyte

What does the Greek root xiph-- mean?
sword; ξίφος (xiphos); xiphoid

What does the Greek root xyl-- mean?
wood; ξύλον (xulon); xylem, xylophone

What does the Greek root zo-- mean?
animal, living being; ζῷον (zōion); protozoa, zoo, zoology

What does the Greek root zon-- mean?
belt, girdle; ζώνη (zōnē); zone

What does the Greek root zyg-- mean?
yoke; ζυγός (zugos); heterozygous, zygote

What is Gqeberha?
Port Elizabeth

What does Matthew 5.43--48 say?
Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. / But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; / That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. / For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same? / And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not even the publicans so? / Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

What was a publican?
tax collector

What does Mark 10.17--26 say?
And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? / And Jesus said unto him, Why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God. / Thou knowest the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honour thy father and mother. / And he answered and said unto him, Master, all these have I observed from my youth. / Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and said unto him, One thing thou lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross, and follow me. / And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had great possessions. / And Jesus looked round about, and saith unto his disciples, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! / And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answereth again, and saith unto them, Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God! / It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. / And they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, Who then can be saved?

Identify the verses: ``And Jesus looked round about, and saith unto his disciples, How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! / And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus answereth again, and saith unto them, Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God! / It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. / And they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, Who then can be saved?''
Mark 10.23--26

What does Matthew 25.44--45 say?
Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? / Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.

Identify the verses: ``Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungred, or athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? / Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me.''
Matthew 25.44--45

Complete this verse: ``Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least of these, [---]'' (Matt. 25.45).
ye did it not to me

What word does Northrop Frye say means ``change of outlook or spiritual metamorphosis''?
metanoia

Identify the verse: ``Bring forth fruits meet for metanoia.''
Matthew 3.8

Complete this quotation: ``With what delight could I have walkt thee round / If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange / Of Hill and Vallie, Rivers, Woods and Plaines, / Now Land, now Sea, \& Shores with Forrest crownd, / Rocks, Dens, and Caves; but I in none of these / Find place or refuge; and the more I see / Pleasures about me, so much more I feel / Torment within me, as from the [---] all good to me becomes / Bane, and in Heav'n much worse would be my state'' (Paradise lost VIII).
hateful siege of contraries

Translate ``Deo concedente.''
God willing

Who wrote The disappearance of rituals?
Han Byung Chul

Who asked, ``What is it like to be a bat?''
Thomas Nagel

Who conceived the notion of affordances?
James Gibson

What is hexis?
habit

``He [---] tai chi.''
plays

What is autopoiesis?
self creation or self organization

``Whereas traditional cognitive science also encompasses these disciplines, [---] finds common purpose in a conception of mind wedded to computationalism: mental processes are computational processes; the brain, qua computer, is the seat of cognition. In contrast, [---] variously rejects or reformulates the computational commitments of cognitive science, emphasizing the significance of an agent's physical body in cognitive abilities.'' (Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy)
embodied cognition

What four words describe 4E cognition?
embodied, embedded, enacted, extended

What are two lattices called if one is a nonzero scalar multiple of the other?
homothetic

Who conceived the notion of hyperobjects?
Timothy Morton

Translate ``Gedankenexperiment.''
thought experiment

How does one say ``thought experiment'' in German?
Gedankenexperiment

Where is Ekibastuz?
north-east Kazakhstan

What does I. N. R. I. abbreviate in the alchemical setting?
Igne Natura Renovatur Integra `All nature is through fire renewed'

What script was invented for the Slavic languages about 860 by the Eastern Orthodox Christian missionaries St. Cyril and his brother St. Methodius? It was based on Greek miniscules.
Glagolitic

(1892--1971) What American theologian and professor of Christian ethics at Union Theological Seminary (1928--60) wrote Moral man and immoral society (1932) and The irony of American history (1952)?
Reinhold Niebuhr

(fl. 5th century BC) This Greek philosopher founded the Eleatic school of philosophers---he was born in Elea in southwestern Italy. In his work On Nature, written in hexameter verse, he maintained that the apparent motion and changing forms of the universe are manifestations of an unchanging and indivisible reality.
Parmenides

Who founded the Eleatic school of philosophers?
Parmenides

Where was Parmenides born?
Elea

Define ``incipient.''
beginning to happen or develop

What Japanese region houses Mount Fuji?
Chubu

On what island can one find Fukuoka?
Kyushu

Traditionally, what is the religion of the Fulani people?
Islam

Define ``fulgent.''
shining brightly

Define ``fulgurant.''
flashing or dazzling like lightning

What verb means ``destroy (small growths or areas of tissue) via diathermy'' or ``flash like lightning''?
fulgurate

What Latin root means ``lightning''?
fulgur

Define ``fuliginous.''
sooty; dusky

What does one call a ball pitched right up to the batter in cricket?
full toss

(1895--1983) What American designer and architect is best known for his invention of the geodesic dome and for his ideals of using the world's resources with maximum purpose and least waste?
Richard Buckminster Fuller

(1608--61) What English cleric and historian is chiefly remembered for The history of the worthies of England (1662), a description of the counties with short biographies of local personages?
Thomas Fuller

Define ``adsorb.''
(of a solid) hold (molecules of a gas or liquid or solute) as a thin film on the outside surface or on internal surfaces within the material

What plant (Dipsacus sativus) has stiff bracts that curve backwards from the prickly flower head?
fuller's teasel

What gull-sized grey and white seabird of the petrel family, with a stocky body and tubular nostrils, comprises two species in the genus Fulmarus (family Procellariidae), in particular F. glacialis of the arctic area and the British Isles?
fulmar

Define ``fulminant.''
(of a disease or symptom) severe and sudden in onset

What word has the definitions ``express vehement protest'' and ``explode violently or flash like lightning''? The name refers to a salt or ester of fulminic acid, too.
fulminate

What very unstable acid isomeric with isocyanic acid has the chemical formula HCNO?
fulminic acid

What is fulminic acid's chemical formula?
HCNO

Define ``fulvous.''
reddish yellow; tawny

What crystalline acid isomeric with maleic acid is present in fumitory and many other plants? Alternatively, it is called ``trans -butenedioic acid.''
fumaric acid

Through what opening in or near a volcano do hot sulphurous gases emerge?
fumarole

What archaic word referred to the excrement of a deer?
fumet

What Old World plant with spikes of small tubular pink or white flowers and finely divided greyish leaves is often considered a weed? It gets its name from the medieval Latin for ``smoke of the earth.''
fumitory

What is a funambulist?
tightrope walker

What is a tightrope walker called?
funambulist

What jural adjective means ``no longer holding office or having official authority''?
functus officio

What is the surgical operation of wrapping part of the fundus of the stomach around the base of the oesophagus to reinforce the sphincter and relieve inflammation caused by reflux?
fundoplication

What is the part of a hollow organ (such as the uterus or the gall bladder) that is furthest from the opening called?
fundus

What is the part of the eyeball opposite the pupil called?
fundus

What is the upper part of the stomach, which forms a bulge above the level of the opening of the oesophagus (furthest from the pylorus)?
fundus

Define ``funebrial.''
having the mournful, sombre character appropriate to a funeral; funereal

On what pile of wood is a corpse burnt as part of a funeral ceremony?
funeral pyre

Define ``fungible.''
replaceable by another identical item; mutually interchangeable

What filamentous stalk attaches a seed or ovule to the placenta?
funicle

What filamentous section of an insect's antenna supports the club?
funicle

What is a bundle of nerve fibres enclosed in a sheath of connective tissue or forming one of the main tracts of white matter in the spinal cord?
funiculus

(1884--1967) What Polish-born American biochemist showed that a number of diseases, including scurvy, rickets, beriberi, and pellagra, were each caused by the deficiency of a particular dietary component and coined the term vitamins for the chemicals concerned?
Casimir Funk

For what is ``funkia'' another term?
hosta

What Muslim people of the mountainous and desert regions of southwestern Sudan speak a Nilo-Saharan language? This language is isolated in its family.
Fur

How many yards are in a furlong?
220

How many furlongs are in a mile?
8

What does ``fur.'' abbreviate?
furlong

Define ``furacious.''
tending to steal; thievish

What colourless volatile liquid with a planar unsaturated five-membered ring in its molecule has the chemical formula C4H4O?
furan

What word means ``gathered strip or pleated border of a skirt or petticoat'' as a noun and ``adorn with trimmings'' as a verb?
furbelow

Define ``furbelowed.''
adorned with trimmings

What word from the Latin for ``fork'' refers to an ingrowth of the thorax of many insects?
furca

What is the the furcula of a springtail called?
furca

Define ``furcate.''
divide into two or more branches

What is the wishbone of a bird called?
furcula

With what the forked appendage at the end of the abdomen in a springtail does the insect jump?
furcula

What Latin root means ``bran''?
furfur

What colourless liquid used in synthetic resin manufacture was originally obtained by distilling bran? It has the chemical formula C4H3OCHO.
furfural

What is the largest of the Furneaux islands?
Flinders island

What group of islands can one find off the coast of northeastern Tasmania in the Bass Strait?
Furneaux islands

For what is ``furze'' another word?
gorse

What lustreless, crumbly, porous type of coal resembles wood charcoal?
fusain

Define ``fuscous.''
dark and sombre in colour

What is the main body of an aircraft called?
fuselage

Define ``fuselage.''
the main body of an aircraft

What word refers to an ``instrument or machine that by alternate expansion and contraction draws in air through a valve or orifice and expels it through a tube'' or a ``metallic or plastic flexible and expansible vessel''?
bellows

(1741--1825) What Swiss-born British painter, art critic, and prominent figure of the romantic movement tended towards the horrifying and the fantastic, as in The nightmare (1781)?
Henry Fuseli

What province houses Fushun?
Liaoning

What was a fusil?
light musket

What is a fusil in heraldry?
elongated lozenge

What pasta is in the form of short spirals?
fusilli

Define ``fusimotor.''
relating to or denoting the motor neurons with slender fibres which innervate muscle spindles

What stiff white kilt is worn by men in Albania and Greece?
fustanella

What is futhark?
runic alphabet

What is the runic alphabet called?
futhark

What padded unsprung mattress originating in Japan can be rolled up or folded in two?
futon

What name is given to each of the middle timbers of a ship's frame, between the floor and the top timbers?
futtock

For what horse race for young horses are entries made long in advance, sometimes before the horses are born?
futurity race

Where is Fuxin?
Liaoning

What is a fylfot?
swastika

What distinctive type of vegetation found only on the southern tip of Africa includes an extensive range of plant species, in particular small heather-like trees and shrubs?
fynbos

(1873--1938) What Russian operatic bass was particularly noted for his roles in Russian opera, such as the title role of Boris Godunov?
Fyodor Ivanovich Chaliapin

What was the English militia anterior to 1066?
fyrd

What does ``FYROM'' abbreviate?
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

What was a fit?
section of a poem

What letter denotes electrons and orbitals possessing three units of angular momentum?
f

``And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi. / And the woman conceived, and bare a son: and when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid him three months. / And when she could not longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch, and put the child therein; and she laid it in the flags by the river's brink. / And his sister stood afar off, to wit what would be done to him. / And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to wash herself at the river; and her maidens walked along by the river's side; and when she saw the ark among the flags, she sent her maid to fetch it. / And when she had opened it, she saw the child: and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children. / Then said his sister to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call to thee a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee? / And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the maid went and called the child's mother. / And Pharaoh's daughter said unto her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the women took the child, and nursed it. / And the child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name ---: and she said, Because I drew him out of the water'' (Exod. 2.1--10).
Moses

What does Psalms 95.10--11 say?
Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said, It is a people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my ways: / Unto whom I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest.

Define ``interregnum.''
period when normal government is suspended, especially between successive reigns or regimes

What period in English history lasted from the execution of Charles I in 1649 to the Restoration of Charles II in 1660?
the Interregnum

Who ``wist not that the skin of his face shone''?
Moses

What does Exodus 20.3--17 outline?
Ten Commandments

What is a sluagh-ghairm?
battle cry

Translate ``Dixi.''
I have spoken

What does Romans 3.21--24 say?
But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being witnessed by the law and the prophets; / Even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe: for there is no difference: / For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God; / Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus

What is the world's most surface area--blessed lake island?
Manitoulin Island

What water body surrounds Manitoulin Island?
Lake Huron

What is Peru's tallest peak?
Huascarán

What gave Kenya its name?
Mt. Kenya

What is Africa's second tallest peak?
Mt. Kenya

Define ``abseil.''
descend a rock face or other near-vertical surface by using a doubled rope coiled round the body and fixed at a higher point

``Now [---] was he, which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die for the people'' (John 18.14).
Caiaphas

``But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are [---]'' (1 Cor. 2.4).
spiritually discerned

What does Matthew 22.32 say?
I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.

Identify the book: ``For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.''
Matthew (5.20)

``And after six days Jesus taketh Peter, James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into an high mountain apart, / And was transfigured before them: and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light. / And, behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him. / Then answered Peter, and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. / While he yet spake, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. / And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were sore afraid. / And Jesus came and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid. / And when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only. / And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying, [---]'' (Matt. 17.1--9).
Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead.

Define ``raiment.''
clothing

Define ``gladiatorial.''
relating to gladiators

``Turn him to any cause of policy, / The [---] of it he will unloose, / Familiar as his garter'' (Henry V).
Gordian knot

What things comprise the Buddhist Ashtamangala?
conch, endless knot, pair of golden fish, lotus, parasol, vase, dharmachakra, dhvaja

Translate ``dhvaja.''
banner

What is the Ashtamangala?
eight auspicious symbols

Define ``koan.''
paradoxical anecdote or riddle, used in Zen Buddhism to demonstrate the inadequacy of logical reasoning and to provoke enlightenment

Where was a man born blind told by Jesus to wash, thereby gaining sight?
Siloam

Who are you?
me

What polyhedron has two faces that are identical polygons in parallel planes but rotated from each other while the other faces are a series of alternately oriented triangles?
antiprism

What words does Christ utter in his first sermon?
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, / To preach the acceptable year of the Lord. (Luke 4.18--19, Isaiah 61.1)

Who ``[awakens] the sleeping images of the future which can come forth from the night . . . to give the world a new and better face'' (The origins and history of consciousness 174)?
the hero

What is a gelding?
castrated animal, especially a male horse

What letter denotes quantum states or wave functions that do not change sign on inversion through the origin?
g

What letter denotes quantum states or wave functions that change sign on inversion through the origin?
u

How many gausses are in one tesla?
10000

What is G and T?
gin and tonic

What element does ``Ga'' symbolize?
gallium

What is GABA?
gamma-aminobutyric acid

What loose long upper garment was worn particularly by Jewish men? The name also refers to a smooth, durable twill-woven cloth, typically of worsted or cotton, or a raincoat made therefrom.
gaberdine

What dark, coarse-grained plutonic rock of crystalline texture consists mainly of pyroxene, plagioclase feldspar, and often olivine?
gabbro

What wirework container filled with rock, broken concrete, or other material is used in the construction of dams, retaining walls, etc.?
gabion

When did Gabon declare independence?
1960

This tropical West African hardwood tree (Aucoumea klaineana) is valued for its timber. Another name for it is ``okoume.''
gaboon

What large, thick-bodied venomous African snake (Bitis gabonica) with a pair of hornlike scales on the snout has a body richly patterned with brown, purple, and cream?
Gaboon viper

(1927--14) What Colombian novelist's works include One hundred years of solitude (1967), a classic example of magic realism, and Love in the time of cholera (1985)? He won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1982.
Gabriel García Márquez

(1845--1921) What French physicist is best known today for his production of the first fully orthochromatic colour photograph in 1893?
Gabriel Jonas Lippmann

(1863--1938) What Italian novelist, playwright, and poet is best known for his ``Romances of the rose'' trilogy, including The triumph of death (1894), which shows the influence of Nietzsche?
Gabriele d'Annunzio

Of whom was Gad the son?
Jacob, Zilpah

What is GAD?
generalized anxiety disorder

Define ``Gadarene.''
involving or engaged in a headlong or potentially disastrous rush to do something

Where did Muammar Muhammad al-Gaddafi enter the world?
Qasr Abu Hadi, Libya

What is gadroon?
decorative edging on metal or wood formed by parallel rounded strips (reeding) like inverted fluting

In what region of Ireland is the vernacular language Irish?
the Gaeltacht

Where do the Gagauz people live?
southern Moldova

What was a gage?
valued object deposited as a guarantee of good faith

What's a flock of geese called?
gaggle

From whom did Gaia come?
Chaos

From whom did Gaia, Tartarus, Erebus, and Nyx come?
Chaos

What was the first created being of Greek mythology?
Chaos

What is gaiety?
the state or quality of being light-hearted or cheerful

What is a foreigner in Japan called?
gaijin

Define ``gainsay.''
deny or contradict

(1727--88) What English painter was famous for his society portraits, including Mr. and Mrs. Andrews (1748) and The blue boy (c. 1770), and for landscapes such as The watering place (1777)?
Thomas Gainsborough

What is n?
letter

When did Apollo 17 happen?
7--19 December 1972

Identify the writer: ``In the small town of Hannibal, Missouri, when I was a boy, everybody was poor, but didn't know it; and everybody was comfortable and did know it.''
Mark Twain

What is Old Dominion?
Virginia

(1870--1938) What outstanding sculptor of the Expressionist movement whose style has often been called ``modern Gothic'' also experimented with graphic art and playwriting? His work in all media is notable for its preoccupation with the sufferings of humanity. He studied art in Hamburg, Germany, and later in Dresden and Paris. Influenced early in his career by Jugendstil, Germany's Art Nouveau style, he vacillated between pursuing sculpture and the decorative arts.
Ernst Barlach

What animal features in the children's book And tango makes three?
penguin

What author is noted for Best word book ever?
Richard Scarry

What is gifted on a 35th wedding anniversary?
coral

Who promulgated the fall of the Berlin Wall to the German public?
Hanns Joachim Friedrichs

Who ended his broadcasts with ``And that's the way it is''?
Walter Cronkite

With what phrase did Walter Cronkite end his broadcasts?
and that's the way it is

What are catarrhine monkeys called alternatively?
Old World monkeys

What does ``OE'' abbreviate?
Old English

What does ``OHG'' abbreviate?
Old High German

Who wrote the textbook on counterpoint Gradus ad Parnassum?
Johann Joseph Fux

Translate ``gradus ad Parnassum.''
steps to Parnassus

What Greek-German mathematician is known for an extension theorem in measure theory?
Constantin Carathéodory

Define ``mendacious.''
not telling the truth; lying

Where is the Marché en Fer?
Port-au-Prince

What is a taikonaut?
Chinese astronaut

What is a Chinese astronaut called?
taikonaut

Beyoncé says that ``he only want me when I'm not there'' and that ``he better call'' whom?
Becky with the good hair

What instrument does Jean-Yves Thibaudet play?
piano

Who wrote ``Rainbow connection''?
Jim Henson

Who created the Muppets?
Jim Henson

Who says to ``consider the lilies of the field''?
Christ (Matt. 6.28)

What is ``[s]ufficient unto the day'' (Matt. 6.34)?
the evil thereof

What does Matthew 6.34 say?
Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

What is the first stage of the opus alchymicum?
nigredo

What are the four steps of the opus alchymicum?
nigredo, albedo, citrinitas, rubedo

Wat is the process that transforms the prima materia to the lapis philosophorum?
opus alchymicum

Who is the son of the macrocosm?
Christ

Who said: ``I haven't read Jung. He's on the Index in France''?
Ricœur

Who was the first ruler of the Akkadians?
Sargon

What is an amicus curiae?
impartial adviser to a court of law in a particular case

Define ``per curiam.''
denoting a decision of an appellate court in unanimous agreement, written anonymously

What Canadian tennis player won 91 doubles titles?
Daniel Nestor

Who ``can't see that all [Carl Jung's] tomes on alchemy added one bit to the weight of his psychoanalytic insight''?
Ernest Becker

What American sociobiologist worked principally on social insects, notably ants and termites, extrapolating his findings to the social behaviour of other animals, including humans?
Edward Osborne Wilson

Of whom was Marie-Louise von Franz a student?
Carl Jung

Where is what you most want to be found?
where you are least likely to look

Translate ``in sterquiliniis invenitur.''
in filth it will be found

Identify the book: ``The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner.''
Psalms

Translate ``lapis.''
stone

Define ``locus.''
particular position or place where something occurs or is situated

Who is Mercurius?
the shape-shifter

What is Hermes?
psychopompos

What soft white claylike material consisting of hydrated magnesium silicate is found chiefly in Turkey and sometimes found floating on the Black Sea? Its French name is ``écume de mer.''
meerschaum

What does ``Meerschaum'' mean in German?
sea foam

What pipe made from a percolative material found floating on the Black Sea develops a rich colour when smoked over time, gives a flavourful smoke, and was the hiding place of the second clue of the film National treasure?
meerschaum pipe

What structure inspired the Eiffel Tower's design?
Latting Observatory

Who was the architect of the Eiffel Tower?
Stephen Sauvestre

Where is Chefchaouen?
Morocco

What is the capital city of Chile's southernmost region, Magallanes y la Antártica Chilena?
Punta Arenas

Complete the list: St. Helena, Ascension, [---].
Tristan da Cunha

Where are iglu-saunas found?
Estonia

What is the largest town on Norfolk Island?
Burnt Pine

What is the right of succession belonging to the firstborn child, especially the feudal rule by which the whole real estate of an intestate passed to the eldest son?
primogeniture

Define ``primogeniture.''
the state of being the firstborn child

By what particles does Salvador Dalí depict a saint being surrounded?
three pi mesons

What is the part of Senegal south of Gambia?
Casamance

What is uxoricide?
the killing of one's wife

Define ``bier.''
movable frame on which a coffin or a corpse is placed before burial or cremation or on which they are carried to the grave

Where does Theseus abandon Ariadne?
Naxos

``Once a mathematician truly gets to know, in an original and `personal' manner, some small part of the mathematical world, however esoteric it may look at first, the journey can properly start.''
Alain Connes

``Mathematics, rightly viewed, possesses not only truth, but supreme beauty --- a beauty cold and austere, like that of sculpture, without appeal to any part of our weaker nature, without the gorgeous trappings of painting or music, yet sublimely pure, and capable of a stern perfection such as only the greatest art can show.''
Bertrand Russell

``God made the integers; all else is the work of man.''
Leopold Kronecker

``Nature laughs at the difficulties of integration.''
Pierre-Simon Laplace

``The mathematician does not study pure mathematics because it is useful; he studies it because he delights in it and he delights in it because it is beautiful.''
Henri Poincaré

``The product of mathematics is clarity and understanding . . . . The world does not suffer from an oversupply of clarity and understanding (to put it mildly). How and whether specific mathematics might lead to improving the world is usually impossible to tease out, but mathematics collectively is extremely important.''
William Thurston

``Believe those who are seeking the truth; doubt those who find it.''
André Gide

``Mathematics is the art of giving the same name to different things.''
Henri Poincaré

``Either mathematics is too big for the human mind or the human mind is more than a machine.''
Kurt Gödel

``We are not to tell nature what she's gotta be. . . . She's always got better imagination than we have.''
Richard Feynman

``To ask the right question is harder than to answer it.''
Georg Cantor

``The art of doing mathematics is finding that special case that contains all the germs of generality.''
David Hilbert

``La découverte est le privilège de l'enfant. C'est du petit enfant que je veux parler, l'enfant qui n'a pas peur encore de se tromper, d'avoir l'air idiot, de ne pas faire sérieux, de ne pas faire comme tout le monde.''
Alexander Grothendieck

``Understanding what did not work and why may be more instructive than celebrating our successes.''
Mikhail Gromov

``Although we humans cut nature up in different ways, and we have different courses in different departments, such compartmentalization is really artificial, and we should take our intellectual pleasures where we find them.''
Richard Feynman

``Chance favours only the prepared mind.''
Louis Pasteur

``The corpus of mathematics resembles a biological entity, which can [survive only] as a whole and which would perish if separated into disjoint pieces.''
Alain Connes

``The epistemological value of probability theory is based on the fact that chance phenomena, considered collectively and on a grand scale, create non-random regularity.''
Andrey Kolmogorov

Deligne says: ``From [---], I have also learned not to take glory in the difficulty of a proof: Difficulty means we have not understood. The idea is to be able to paint a landscape in which the proof is obvious.''
Alexander Grothendieck

``While the other sciences search for the rules that God has chosen for this universe, we mathematicians search for the rules that even God has to obey.''
Jean-Pierre Serre

What American plant of the daisy family, cultivated for its bright red and yellow flowers, is named after an 18th-century French botanist?
gaillardia

(c. 70--8 BC) What Roman statesman was a trusted adviser of Augustus and a notable patron of poets such as Virgil and Horace?
Gaius Maecenas

(c. 157--86 BC) This Roman general and politician was elected consul in 107 BC. He defeated Jugurtha and invading Germanic tribes. After a power struggle with Sulla, he was expelled from Italy but returned to take Rome by force in 87 BC.
Gaius Marius

(d. 66 AD) What Roman writer is generally accepted as the author of the Satyricon, a work in prose and verse satirizing the excesses of Roman society?
Gaius Petronius

What name is given to a food or drug that promotes or increases the flow of a mother's milk?
galactagogue

Define ``galactagogue.''
food or drug that promotes or increases the flow of a mother's milk

Of what crystalline amino sugar, whose chemical formula is C6H13NO5, is chondroitin a derivative?
galactosamine

What does the Greek root ``galaktos'' mean?
milk

For what is ``galago'' another term?
bushbaby

What noblest of King Arthur's legendary knights was renowned for immaculate purity and destined to find the Holy Grail?
Galahad

What is a collector of snowdrops called?
galanthophile

Define ``galantine.''
dish of white meat or fish boned, cooked, pressed, and served cold in aspic

What sea nymph was courted by the cyclops Polyphemus, who, in jealousy, killed his rival Acis?
Galatea

What name was given to the statue fashioned by Pygmalion and brought to life?
Galatea

On what river can one find Galaţi?
Danube

Who succeeded Nero?
Galba

Who organized the murder of Galba?
Otho

From kinds of what is galbanum produced?
ferula

What Korean dish of beef short ribs is usually marinated in soy sauce, garlic, and sugar, and sometimes cooked on a grill at the table?
galbi

(129--99) What Greek physician attempted to systematize the whole of medicine, making important discoveries in anatomy and physiology? His works became influential in Europe when retranslated from Arabic in the 12th century.
Galen

What bluish, grey, or black mineral of metallic appearance, consisting of lead sulphide, is the chief ore of lead?
galena

Define ``galère.''
undesirable group or coterie

What is the shape of a galea?
helmet

What is a (fresh) gale in knots?
34--40

What is a (fresh) gale in km/h?
63--74

What small rounded melon of a variety with rough skin and fragrant orange flesh is named after a Hebrew given name?
galia melon

What is Galicia's capital?
Santiago de Compostela

What is another name for the Carib language?
Galibi

(1573--1624) What German astronomer discovered the Galilean moons independent of Galileo?
Simon Marius

What is Lake Kinneret?
Sea of Galilee

What is Lake Tiberias?
Sea of Galilee

What fish with a dark mark near each pectoral fin, in particular a widely farmed cichlid of Africa and the Middle East, is also called the ``tilapia'' or the ``Galilee cichlid''? Its name alludes to Matthew 17.27.
St. Peter's fish

What was Galina Ulanova's occupation?
ballet dancer

Who created the role of Juliet in Prokofiev's Romeo and Juliet?
Galina Ulanova

What Eurasian sedge (Cyperus longus) with an aromatic rhizome was used in perfumes?
galingale

What was a galliot?
single-masted Dutch cargo boat or fishing vessel

What hardened resin deposits form on the stem of the maritime pine?
galipot

Define ``galipot.''
hardened resin deposits formed on the stem of the maritime pine

What deep-bodied marine fish (Coracinus capensis) with a spiny dorsal fin, occurring in shallow waters around South Africa, is also called ``blackfish''?
galjoen

What is an alternative name for ``galjoen''?
blackfish

What alternative name for ``Oromo'' is, for some reason, not favoured by those people and regarded as pejorative or offensive?
Galla

For what is ``gallberry'' another name?
inkberry

Where is the seaport Galle?
Sri Lanka

What ailing ship was in use, especially by Spain, from the 15th to the 18th centuries, initially as a warship and later for trade? They were typically square-rigged and had three or more decks and masts.
galleon

Define ``gallet.''
chip or splinter of stone inserted into wet mortar

What is the southern province of Transalpine Gaul?
Gallia Narbonensis

What type of verse is written in a metre consisting of two catalectic iambic dimeters?
galliambic

What golden-yellow Italian liqueur flavoured with herbs is named after a major noted for halting Ethiopian forces in the war of 1895--96?
Galliano

What is the metre in which the galliard is danced?
triple

How many people dance the galliard?
two

What low, flat ship with one or more sails and up to three banks of oars was chiefly used for warfare or piracy and often manned by slaves or criminals?
galley

What is a printer's proof in the form of long single-column strips, not in sheets or pages? The name comes from French, denoting an oblong tray for holding set-up type.
galley proof

What acid extracted from oak galls and other vegetable products, formerly used in making ink, has the chemical formula C6H2(OH)3COOH?
gallic acid

What is gallic acid's systematic name?
3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid

What does the adverb ``gallice'' mean?
in French

What language does ``gallice'' denote?
French

What were galligaskins?
breeches, trousers, or gaiters

What animal did the gallimimus resemble?
ostrich

What marshbird of the rail family, with mainly black, purplish-blue, or dark green plumage and a red bill, comprises several species in the genus Porphyrio?
gallinule

What Irish name referred to a mercenary or member of a particular class of soldiers in a chieftain's service?
gallowglass

How many pints does a gallon hold?
8

How many litres does a gallon hold?
4.55

What area of southwestern Scotland consists of the two former counties of Kirkcudbrightshire and Wigtownshire and is now part of the Dumfries and [---] region?
Galloway

What structure, typically of two uprights and a crosspiece, was used for the hanging of criminals?
gallows

Define ``gallus.''
bold, cheeky, or flashy

Who painted ``The treachery of images''?
Magritte

On what painting did Magritte inscribe ``Ceci n'est pas une pipe''?
The treachery of images

What does ``The treachery of images'' (not) depict?
pipe

Of what river is the Tatarka a tributary?
Yegorlyk

Of what river is Yegorlyk a left tributary?
Manych

Of what river is Manych a tributary?
Don

Who says that ``if nothing impedes the process of gestation, all ores will, in time, become gold''?
Eliade

Who wrote The Nabatean agriculture?
Ibn Waḥshiyya

What is ``magic based on the assumption that a person or thing can be supernaturally affected through its name or an object representing it''?
sympathetic magic

Define ``spagyric.''
relating to alchemy

Translate ``hour'' to Bahasa.
jam

Identify the verse: ``But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting.''
Micah 5.2

Identify the verse: ``Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am.''
John 8.58

(1926--2003) What Argentinian general and statesman's military junta ordered the invasion of the Falkland Islands in 1982, precipitating the Falklands War? He was president from 1981 to 1982.
Leopoldo Fortunato Galtieri

(1737--98) What Italian anatomist studied the structure of organs and the physiology of tissues but is best known for his discovery of the twitching of frogs' legs in an electric field?
Luigi Galvani

What is a gal?
one centimetre per second per second

What province contains Galway?
Connacht

To what district of France is the Gamay grape native?
Beaujolais

What variety of black wine grape native to the Beaujolais district of France is named after a hamlet in Burgundy, eastern France?
Gamay

Translate ``mushroom'' to Magyar.
gomba

Where are the Gambier Islands?
French Polynesia

What astringent extract of a tropical Asiatic plant used in tanning is called, alternatively, ``catechu''? It shares its name with an island group.
gambier

What gum resin produced by various East Asian trees belonging to the genus Garcinia (family Guttiferae), particularly G. xanthochymus, is used as a yellow pigment and in medicine as a purgative?
gamboge

What is a gambrel roof?
roof with two sides, each of which has a shallower slope above a steeper one

``gambrel [---]''
roof

What small live-bearing fish found in mangrove creeks and brackish waters of the southern US and northern Mexico were widely introduced for mosquito control? They are called, alternatively, ``mosquito fish.''
gambusia

From where does gamelan originate?
Bali/Java

Define ``gametangium.''
specialized organ or cell in which gametes are formed in algae, ferns, and some other plants

What gamete-producing and usually haploid phase produces the zygote from which the sporophyte arises in the life cycle of plants with alternating generations? It is the dominant form in bryophytes.
gametophyte

What was a gamin?
street urchin

What was a street urchin?
child who lives, or spends most of his or her time, in the streets

What does gamma-aminobutyric acid inhibit?
the transmission of nerve impulses in the central nervous system

What liquid compound used as a solvent and sometimes taken as a recreational drug is metabolized in the body to produce the active substance GHB and has the chemical formula C4H6O2 (forming a simple lactone ring)?
butyrolactone

For what is ``gamma-HCH'' another term?
lindane

What does ``HCH'' abbreviate?
hexachlorocyclohexane

What does ``GHB'' abbreviate?
gamma-hydroxybutyrate

What has the chemical formula CH2OH(CH2)2COONa?
NaGHB

What polyunsaturated fatty acid present as a glyceride in linseed and other oils and essential in the human diet has the chemical formula C17H29COOH? It has one more double bond than linoleic acid.
linolenic acid

Define ``gammer.''
old countrywoman

What dialect of Chinese is spoken mainly in Jiangxi?
Gan

For what is ``Ganapati'' another name?
Ganesh

What industrial city in Azerbaijan was called ``Yelizavetpol'' (1804--1918) and ``Kirovabad'' (1935--89)?
Gäncä

(1889--1981) What French film director was an early pioneer of technical experimentation in film? His notable films include La roue (1923) and Napoléon (1927).
Abel Gance

What is the French name for Ghent?
Gand

What is a male goose?
gander

What town's airport served the first regular transatlantic flights during the Second World War?
Gander

What city is the capital of Gujarat?
Gandhinagar

What elephant-headed deity, son of Shiva and Parvati, is usually depicted coloured red, with a pot belly and one broken tusk, riding a rat?
Ganesh

What name was given to the group of four associates, including Mao Zedong's wife, involved in implementing the Cultural Revolution? They were among the groups competing for power after Mao's death in 1976 but were arrested and imprisoned.
Gang of Four

What structure containing a number of nerve cell bodies, typically linked by synapses, often forms a swelling on a nerve fibre?
ganglion

What group of structures linked to the thalamus in the base of the brain is involved in the coordination of movement?
basal ganglia

Define ``gangle.''
move ungracefully

What city in the foothills of the Kanchenjunga mountain range is the capital of the state of Sikkim?
Gangtok

What is gangue?
the commercially valueless material in which ore is found

What is the commercially valueless material in which ore is found?
gangue

What large seabird with mainly white plumage that catches fish by plunging into the water comprises three species in the genus Morus (family Sulidae), in particular M. bassanus of the North Atlantic?
gannet

What is a gannetry?
breeding colony of gannets, usually on an isolated rock

Define ``ganoid.''
(of fish scales) hard and bony with a shiny surface that resembles enamel

What narrow, mountainous province forms a corridor through which the Silk Road passed?
Gansu

What line passed through a block near the masthead is used to hoist sails or rigging?
gantline

What bridge-like overhead structure has a platform supporting equipment such as a crane, signals, lights, or cameras?
gantry

What chart shows the amount of work done or production completed in specific periods of time in relation to the amount planned for those periods via a series of horizontal lines?
Gantt chart

What Trojan youth was so beautiful that he was carried off to be Zeus's cup-bearer?
Ganymede

What is the largest satellite in the solar system?
Ganymede

What is ganzfeld?
technique of controlled sensory input used with the aim of improving results in tests of telepathy and other paranormal phenomena

What is the upper part of a graft?
scion

What is the lower part of a graft?
understock

What does ``GAA'' abbreviate?
Gaelic Athletic Association

What is the 高考?
test of a student's academic skills, used for admission to colleges and universities

What is the gaokao?
test of a student's academic skills, used for admission to colleges and universities

What is the alternative spelling for ``jail''?
gaol

What deep-sea anglerfish that is able to inflate itself with water belongs to the family Chaunacidae and genus Chaunax?
gaper

What burrowing bivalve mollusk, the shell valves of which have an opening at one or both ends, belongs to the genus Mya in the family Myidae?
gaper

What species causes the gapes in birds?
Syngamus trachea

What parasitic nematode worm (Syngamus trachea) infests the trachea and bronchi of birds?
gapeworm

What is the omission of a verb in the second of two coordinated clauses?
gapping

What traditional Gujarati folk dance and song, originally performed as a fertility ritual, is named after the Sanskrit for ``lamp inside a pot''?
garba

What is a garbanzo?
chickpea

What is the first range of planks or plates laid on a ship's bottom next to the keel?
garboard

What lake in northeastern Italy lies between Lombardy and Venetia?
Lake Garda

What eel of warm seas lives in a burrow from which its head and foreparts protrude, enabling it to catch passing food? They comprise several genera and species in the family Congridae.
garden eel

To what garden did Jesus go with his disciples after the Last Supper, where he was betrayed (Matt. 26.36--46)?
Garden of Gethsemane

What is the Garden State?
New Jersey

Define ``garderobe.''
toilet in a medieval building

(b. 1947) What Welsh rugby union player --- an international player from 1967 to 1978 --- was the youngest-ever Welsh captain when appointed in 1968?
Sir Gareth Edwards

Who was the 20th president of the United States?
James Abram Garfield

When was James Garfield assassinated?
September 1881

What is Garganega?
variety of white wine grape used in making Soave and other Italian white wines

The male of this small Eurasian duck (Anas querquedula, family Anatidae) has a dark brown head with a white stripe from the eye to the neck.
garganey

What is the inflammation of a cow's or ewe's udder?
garget

For what is ``gargoylism'' another term?
Hurler's syndrome

Who was the military leader of the Risorgimento?
Giuseppe Garibaldi

What small bright orange marine fish (Hypsypops rubicundus, family Pomacentridae) found off California is named after a historical political figure?
garibaldi

What is an independent prospector for minerals in Brazil?
garimpeiro

Define ``garish.''
obtrusively bright and showy; lurid

What was Ismail Samani Peak's original name?
Mount Garmo

What is Mount Garmo called nowadays?
Ismail Samani Peak

What variety of wine grape grown in Spain is known as ``Grenache'' in France and elsewhere?
Garnacha

What is Garnacha?
variety of wine grape grown in Spain

What is a court order directing that money or property of a third party (usually wages paid by an employer) be seized to satisfy a debt owed by a debtor to a plaintiff creditor?
garnishment

What river of southwestern France rises in the Pyrenees and flows 645 km northwest through Toulouse and Bordeaux to join the River Dordogne at the Gironde estuary?
Garonne

Define ``garrotte.''
kill (someone) by strangulation, especially with a length of wire or cord

What river port in northern Cameroon lies on the River Bénoué?
Garoua

For what is ``garron'' another term?
Highland pony

What is a garryowen?
up-and-under

What is the principal King of Arms of the English College of Arms?
Garter King of Arms

What prevalent, harmless North American snake that typically has well-defined longitudinal stripes and favours damp habitats comprises several species in the genus Thamnophis in the family Colubridae, particularly T. sirtalis?
garter snake

What eagle-like being serves as the mount of Vishnu?
Garuda

(b. 1960) What English footballer --- a striker with Leicester City, Everton, Barcelona, and Tottenham Hotspur --- scored 48 goals for England, one short of Bobby Charlton's record?
Gary Lineker

Where did Gary Player enter the world?
Johannesburg

What does Exodus 1.15--22 say?
And the king of Egypt spake to the Hebrew midwives, of which the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah: / And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and see them upon the stools; if it be a son, then ye shall kill him: but if it be a daughter, then she shall live. / But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men children alive. / And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said unto them, Why have ye done this thing, and have saved the men children alive? / And the midwives said unto Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women; for they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them. / Therefore God dealt well with the midwives: and the people multiplied, and waxed very mighty. / And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses. / And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive.

``And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people: and the people stood by Moses from the morning unto the evening. / And when Moses' father in law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What is this thing that thou doest to the people? why sittest thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by thee from morning unto even? / And Moses said unto his father in law'' what? (Exod. 18.13--16)
Because the people come unto me to enquire of God: / When they have a matter, they come unto me; and I judge between one and another, and I do make them know the statutes of God, and his laws.

 ``Without continuous mathematics, the study of discrete mathematics becomes trivial and very limited. . . . The two topics, discrete and continuous mathematics, are both ill-served by being rigidly separated.'' Who said this?
Richard Hamming

``Each problem that I solved became a rule which served afterwards to solve other problems.'' Who said this?
Rene Descartes

``The ego can see and experience the archetypal constellations of the unconscious directly or indirectly --- directly by perceiving them on the inner projection plane as psychic images, indirectly by experiencing them in their projection into the world.'' From what work is this?
The Great Mother

What collection of essays did Northrop Frye write on Canadian culture? It includes the essay ``Across the river and out of the trees.''
Divisions on a ground

With what is the first movement of Mahler's Symphony no. 9 marked?
andante comodo

What does ``panta rei'' mean?
everything flows

What is ``that which we might call the liquid version of self''? ``It is the primal water which contains all four elements. Man's inner life is the ``secret place" where the [---], the panacea, the spark of the light of nature, are to be found. The alchemists put their art on the level of divine revelation and regarded it as an essential component of redemption.''
aqua permanens

Complete the list: separatio, divisio, putrefactio, mortificatio, [---].
solutio

Who published the Musaeum Hermeticum in 1625?
Lucas Jennis

Define ``Paraclete.''
the Holy Spirit as advocate or counsellor (Jn. 14.16, 26)

Define ``antedate.''
precede in time

What is WAIS-R?
IQ test

Who writes that ``perhaps the entire cosmos is not worth a single child's suffering''?
Dostoevsky

``The kingdom of heaven is spread out upon the earth but [---].''
men do not see it

What does ``SAQ'' abbreviate?
Société des alcools du Québec

What does ``SAAQ'' abbreviate?
Société de l'assurance automobile du Québec

Translate ``consensus omnium'' (Synchronicity 24).
with everyone's approval

Translate ``Descensus ad Inferos.''
Harrowing of Hell

Identify the verse: ``He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do.''
John 14.12

(11 Nov. 1961) What papal encyclical commemorates the fifteenth centennial of the death of Pope Leo I? It was Pope John XXIII's sixth.
Aeterna Dei sapientia `God's eternal wisdom'

Who were Adam and Eve's three identified children?
Cain, Abel, Seth

What does ``SNARE'' abbreviate?
SNAP REceptor

What is SNAP-25?
t-SNARE

What is a v-SNARE?
vesicle SNAP REceptor

What is a t-SNARE?
target SNAP REceptor

Who discovered ubiquitin in 1975?
Gideon Goldstein

Who directed Pulp fiction?
Quentin Tarantino

Who directed Kill Bill?
Quentin Tarantino

Who stars in Kill Bill?
Uma Thurman

What does Smith \& Wesson make?
firearms

Who plays Dirty Harry?
Clint Eastwood

Who directed Dirty Harry?
Don Siegel

What does Mahler call the song ``Frère Jacques'' at the beginning of the third movement of his Symphony no. 1?
Bruder Martin

Where is Terceira?
Açores

What is the biggest island of the Açores?
São Miguel

What is the capital of the Açores?
Ponta Delgada

Where is Ponta Delgada?
São Miguel, Açores

What is a peregrination?
journey, especially a long or meandering one

``The inner world is divided into [---], much as the outer.'' (Maps of meaning 436)
familiar and unknown territory

What primordial figure can the mythical pelican represent?
uruboros 

Whose vision does Jung describe in Psychology and Alchemy starting as follows: ``[He] tells of his adventure with the Rex marinus, in whose kingdom nothing prospers and nothing is begotten. Moreover there are no philosophers there. Only like mates with like, consequently there is no procreation. The King must seek the counsel of the philosophers and mate Thabritius with Beya, his two children whom he has hatched in his brain.''
Arisleus

``They suffer from the intense heat, like the three whom Nebuchadnezzar cast into the fiery furnace. King Nebuchadnezzar had a vision of a fourth, `like the son of God,' as we are told in Daniel 3.25 [`He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.'] This vision is not without bearing on alchemy, since there are numerous passages in the literature stating that the stone is [---]. It consists of the four elements, with fire representing the spirit concealed in matter. This is the fourth, absent and yet present, who always appears in the fiery agony of the furnace and symbolizes the divine presence --- succour and the completion of the work.''
Trinus et Unus

To what century is the Berlin Codex dated?
fifth AD

What knitwear company was established in 1784 and is centred in Lea Mills, Derbyshire?
John Smedley

Who was the first person to receive two Nobel Prizes in the same field (Physics)?
John Bardeen

Translate ``an sich.''
per se

Who says that ``the single archetypes are not isolated from each other in the unconscious''?
Neumann

For what event did Felix Mendelssohn write his fifth symphony?
tercentennial of the Augsburg Confession

What symphony (numbered) did Felix Mendelssohn write for the tercentennial of the Augsburg Confession?
fifth

Where was Mahler rowing when he conceived the accompaniment rhythm for the first movement of his seventh symphony?
Maiernigg

Where did Mahler compose his fifth, sixth, seventh, and eight symphonies?
Maiernigg

What dance form with a distinctive rhythm and harmony did Beethoven use in his fifth symphony?
folia

Translate ``cake'' to Hungarian.
totra

Who plunged Achilles into the Styx?
Thetis

What metabolic pathway starts in the liver or the kidney and produces glucose after glucose-6-phosphate is hydrolyzed by glucose-6-phosphatase, the culmination of eleven enzyme-catalyzed reactions?
gluconeogenesis

Where is the Alvar Aalto Museum?
Jyväskylä

What metabolic pathway produces ketone bodies (acetoacetate, acetone, beta-hydroxybutyrate) synthesized from acetyl-CoA molecules, providing the body with an alternative form of energy?
ketogenesis 

What ketone bodies does ketogenesis produce?
acetoacetate, acetone, beta-hydroxybutyrate

With what notable descriptor does the Vulgate describe Moses's head? This is reflected in Michelangelo's sculpture.
cornuta `horned'

What is Lake Malawi's name in Tanzania?
Lake Nyasa

What was the winter palace of the Dalai Lama before 1959?
Potala Palace

What was İzmir's name in ancient times? 
Smyrna

What is Smyrna today?
İzmir

What triangle-shaped deposit of gravel, sand, and even smaller pieces of sediment, such as silt, is usually created as flowing water interacts with mountains, hills, or the steep walls of canyons?
alluvial fan

What desert contains Palmyra?
Syrian Desert

What was Paul III's birth name?
Alessandro Farnese

What was Alessandro Farnese's papal name?
Paul III

What is Aachen's French name? 
Aix-la-Chapelle

Whence did Michelle Obama receive her Juris Doctor?
Harvard University

What Egyptian deity united with the sun god Ra? 
Ammon

What is a failure in recognition caused by a failure of perception?
apperceptive agnosia

What is ``the . . . perfect example of the still undifferentiated primordial archetype'' (Neumann 18)?
uruoboros

What's the other name for the acetabulum: the socket of the hipbone into which the head of the femur fits?
cotyloid cavity

Where is Ny-Ålesund?
Svalbard

What date is on Delaware's flag?
December 7, 1787

What is acclaimed to be the oldest quadrangle in Oxford?
Tom Quad

Where is ThyssenKrupp headquartered?
Essen

What valley does the Europabrücke cross?
Wipp Valley (Brenner Pass)

What is the largest of the Eolie Islands?
Lipari Island

What is Svalbard's third largest island?
Edgeøya

What is Cape Salang?
Phuket

What is the highest peak of the Adirondack Mountains?
Mt. Marcy

Where is the first bend of the Yangtze?
Yunnan

On what river is the Akosombo Dam?
Volta

What part of the Amazon River lies entirely in Amazonas? 
Rio Solimões

What were the last words Mozart wrote?
quam olim d: c

What water body forms the north-west corner of the White Sea?
Kandalaksha Gulf

What is Antidorcas marsupialis?
springbok 

What is the direction toward the Kaaba called?
qibla

What Tibetan religious painting or drawing on woven material, usually cotton, has a bamboo-cane rod pasted on the bottom edge by which it can be rolled up?
thang-ka

What is considered to be the busiest pedestrian intersection?
Shibuya crossing

What ``forms the foundation of . . . the `elementary character of the Feminine''' (Neumann 28)?
the natural inertia that causes certain contents of the unconscious to remain unconscious and certain contents of consciousness to become unconscious --- taken together with the symbolic phenomenon of the predominant femininity of the unconscious in its relation to consciousness

What is Jung talking about here? ``[It] is a term derived from Lévy-Bruhl. It denotes a peculiar kind of psychological connection with objects, and consists in the fact that the subject cannot clearly distinguish himself from the object but is bound to it by a direct relationship which amounts to partial identity.''
participation mystique

From whom does Jung say the term ``participation mystique'' derives?
Lucien Lévy-Bruhl

Were is Quatre Bornes?
Mauritius

What does ``sophia'' mean in Greek?
wisdom

What two cities does the A331 Vilyuy highway connect?
Yakutsk, Mirny

What is ``abaissement du niveau mental''?
reduced state of concentration and attention, accompanied by a loosening of inhibitions and relaxation of restraints, in which unexpected contents may emerge from the unconscious

What reduced state of concentration and attention, accompanied by a loosening of inhibitions and relaxation of restraints, in which unexpected contents may emerge from the unconscious? It usually occurs spontaneously but can be deliberately encouraged in preparation for active imagination. Jung (1875--1961) borrowed the term from his teacher, the French psychologist and neurologist Pierre Janet (1859--1947). (Oxford Reference)
abaissement du niveau mental

What is personal equation?
variation (as in observation) occasioned by the personal peculiarities of an individual; the difference in performance attributed to individual differences

By what thing is the 5' cap of eukaryotic messenger RNA bound?
cap binding complex

What enzymes acetylate conserved lysine amino acids on histone proteins by transferring an acetyl group from acetyl-CoA to form epsilon-N-acetyllysine?
histone acetyltransferase

What factor coordinates the activities of more than seventy polypeptides required for initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase II, binds to the core promoter to position the polymerase properly, serves as the scaffold for assembly of the remainder of the transcription complex, and acts as a channel for regulatory signals?
transcription factor II D

What type of cytokine and type of immunomodulating agent helps the body’s immune system fight infection and other diseases, such as cancer?
interferon

What does ``GEF'' abbreviate?
guanine nucleotide exchange factor

What cytoplasmic protein is recruited to the inner cell membrane by adaptor proteins? It displaces guanosine diphosphate (GDP) from a small G protein like RAS, allowing GTP to bind to the small G protein and activate it. RAS then cleaves the bound GTP to GDP and reverts to its inactive state.
GEF

What does ``GAP'' abbreviate?
GTPase activating protein

What GEF is important in the cell growth-regulatory MAPK/ERK pathway? It binds GRB2 at the plasma membrane after EGF receptor activation and activates the small G protein Ras.
SOS1 (son of sevenless)

What does ``eIF'' abbreviate?
eukaryotic initiation factor

What guanine nucleotide exchange factor for Ran GTPase localizes to the nucleus and catalyzes the activation of Ran to allow the nuclear export of proteins?
RCC1 

What does ``RCC1'' abbreviate?
regulator of chromosome condensation 1

What member of the Dbl family of proteins and Rho GEF plays an important role in nerve growth and axonal development? By promoting the release of GDP from Rac and RhoA, it acts as an activator of GTPase signalling within the cell. It controls dendritic arborization, dendritic spine formation, synaptic activity, and plasticity.
kalirin

What does ``MAPK'' abbreviate?
mitogen-activated protein kinase

What does ``ERK'' abbreviate?
extracellular signal-regulated kinase

What chain of proteins in the cell communicates a signal from a receptor on the surface of the cell to the DNA in the nucleus of the cell? Its general structure includes a small G protein (RAS) and three protein kinases (RAF, MEK, ERK). The starting point for this pathway is the binding of ligand to a transmembrane protein, a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK). The resulting signalling cascade culminates with the translocation of ERK to the nucleus, where ERK activates transcription factors that result in gene expression.
MAPK/ERK pathway

What is AZD6244?
Selumetinib: a MEK1/2 inhibitor

What oral inhibitor of BRAF V600E was discovered and developed by GlaxoSmithKline? Positive results from a phase 3 trial, BREAK-3, were presented at the 2012 American Society of Clinical Oncology annual meeting.
Dabrafenib

What does ``GDP'' abbreviate (biology)?
guanosine diphosphate

What does ``HGF'' abbreviate?
hepatocyte growth factor

What factor is secreted by stromal cells in tumours and activates MET, a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)? It activates both MAPK and PI-3K pathways and is implicated in resistance to BRAF inhibitors. Along with its receptor, it may offer a new therapeutic target in metastatic melanoma to be used in combination with RAF inhibition.
HGF

What infused immunomodulator was approved by the FDA in 2011 for patients with advanced melanoma? This fully human monoclonal antibody blocks cytotoxic T-lymphocyte--associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4), which down-regulates pathways leading to T-cell activation.
Ipilimumab

What is an enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of a phosphate group from a donor, such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) or adenosine diphosphate (ADP) to an acceptor (e.g. tyrosine)?
kinase

What does ``GTP'' abbreviate?
guanosine triphosphate

What orally available small molecule selective for BRAF V600E is being investigated in combination with an inhibitor of MEK1 and MEK2 called MEK162?
LGX818

What does ``KRAS'' abbreviate?
Kirsten RAt Sarcoma virus

What activator of transcription factors is initiated by a small G protein (e.g. NRAS) upon its activation by a GEF? The first enzyme activated is MAPKKKK, followed by MAPKK, and finally MAPK.
MAP kinase cascade

What does ``MAPKKK'' abbreviate?
MAP kinase kinase kinase

What does ``MEK'' abbreviate?
mitogen-activated ERK kinase

What family of seven human MAP kinase kinases has dual specificity for tyrosine and serine/threonine residues? It is a component of four signalling pathways: ERK1/2, p38, JNK, and ERK5. 
MEK

What orally available inhibitor of MEK1 and MEK2 is also known as ``ARRY-162''?
MEK162

What is another name for MEK162?
ARRY-162

What is MK2206?
Akt inhibitor

What is Akt?
protein kinase B

What does ``ORR'' abbreviate?
objective response rate/overall response rate

What endpoint in cancer trials is often defined as the percentage of subjects with a confirmed complete response (CR) or partial response (PR) at any time per RECIST 1.1?
ORR

What does ``PFS'' abbreviate?
progression-free survival

What does ``PI-3K'' abbreviate?
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase

What small molecule irreversibly inhibits PI-3K?
PX-866

What does PX-866 irreversibly inhibit?
PI-3K

What cytosolic protein kinase directly activates MEK following its activation by RAS?
RAF

What does ``RAF'' abbreviate (biology)?
rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma

What does ``RECIST'' abbreviate?
Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors

What does ``RTK'' abbreviate?
receptor tyrosine kinase

What oral small molecule that inhibits MEK1 and MEK2 was developed by Array BioPharma and licensed to AstraZeneca?
Selumetinib

What monomeric G proteins (e.g. NRAS) serve as intracellular signalling molecules? When active, they bind GTP and hydrolyze it to GDP, becoming inactive.
small G protein

What oral selective inhibitor of MEK1 and MEK2 was discovered by Japan Tobacco and licensed by GlaxoSmithKline in 2006? It was the first MEK inhibitor to demonstrate efficacy in a late-phase melanoma trial; the phase 3 trial was METRIC.
Trametinib

What drug selectively binds to the ATP-binding site of the BRAF V600E mutation, present in about half of all melanomas (and in 8 percent of all solid tumours)?
Vemurafenib

What is Yervoy?
Ipilimumab

What is Zelboraf?
Vemurafenib

What does ''אדמה`` mean?
earth

What is the process by which a cell responds to substances outside the cell through signalling molecules found on the surface of and inside the cell?
signal transduction

Who founded Rolex?
Hans Wilsdorf 

Who founded Tudor?
Hans Wilsdorf 

What sidereal name is given to the free monoid construction?
Kleene star

What does ``DFA'' abbreviate in computation?
deterministic finite automaton

Where was Yitzhak Danziger born?
Berlin

Whose sculpture of Nimrod illustrated the Canaanite idea?
Yitzhak Danziger 

Define ``duomo.''
Italian cathedral

Translate ``duomo.''
dome

What is the peak of the Allegheny Mountains?
Spruce Knob

Of what mountain range is Spruce Knob the peak?
Allegheny Mountains

Where was Linus Torvalds born?
Helsinki

What is Linus's law?
given a large enough beta-tester and co-developer base, almost every problem will be characterized quickly and the fix obvious to someone

When did Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay ascend Mount Everest?
29 May 1953

Where was Edmund Hillary born?
Auckland, New Zealand

What was Edmund Hillary's country of origin?
New Zealand

What does ``CpG'' abbreviate?
cytosine triphosphate deoxynucleotide, phosphodiester link, guanine triphosphate deoxynucleotide 

What does ``CpG ODN'' abbreviate?
CpG oligodeoxynucleotide

Who was Suleiman the Magnificent's chief architect and engineer?
Mimar Sinan

Who designed the Süleymaniye Mosque?
Mimar Sinan

What does ``FUS/TLS'' abbreviate?
FUsed in Sarcoma/Translocated in LipoSarcoma

What signalling pathway controls organ size in animals through the regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis? Its name comes from its principal signalling component (a protein kinase).
hippo signalling pathway

Who analyzed Leonardo da Vinci's personality?
Erich von Neumann

What Raphael painting, was bought for the Hermitage by Emperor Nicholas I of Russia in 1836 and sold to Andrew Mellon by the Soviet Government in 1931 for 1,166,400 dollars: the largest sum ever paid for a painting until that time?
Alba Madonna

Who bought Raphael's Alba Madonna in 1836?
Nicholas I of Russia

What is the ``absorption or joining up of a new conscious content to already prepared subjective material, whereby the similarity of the new content with the waiting subjective material is specially emphasized, even to the prejudice of the independent quality of the new content''?
assimilation

What is a ``process of dissimilation wherein a subjective content is estranged from the subject and, in a sense, incorporated in the object''?
projection

What does ``EJC'' abbreviate?
exon junction complex

What protein complex is made up of  RNPS1, Y14, SRm160, Aly/REF, Magoh, and eIF4A-III among other protein components?
EJC

What proteins are considered to be RNA helicases, many of which are required in cellular processes such as RNA metabolism, including nuclear transcription, pre-mRNA splicing, ribosomebiogenesis, nucleocytoplasmic transport, translation, RNA decay and organellar gene expression? The Walker B motif (asp-glu-ala-asp) gives them their name.
DEAD box

What does NtrC kiss?
DNA polymerase

What does ``NtrC'' abbreviate?
nitrogen regulatory protein C

What is ``the vehicle par excellence of the transformative character . . . , the mover, the instigator of change, whose fascination drives, lures, and encourages the male to all the adventures of the soul and spirit, of action and creation in the inner and the outward world''?
anima

Who completed the Santa Maria Novella's facade?
Leon Battista Alberti

Define ``demarcate.''
set the boundaries or limits of

What highway does the New Malham Bridge (كوبري ملهم الجديد) cross over?
Highway 65 (Riyadh--Qassim Expressway)

What does ``CHARGE syndrome'' abbreviate?
coloboma, heart disease, atresia of the choanae, retarded growth and mental development, genital anomalies, and ear malformations and hearing loss syndrome

What is Drosophila melanogaster?
fruit fly

What RNA has a well-defined structure that is a short (usually 20 to 24-bp) double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) with phosphorylated 5' ends and hydroxylated 3' ends with two overhanging nucleotides? The Dicer enzyme catalyzes its production from long dsRNAs and small hairpin RNAs. It interferes with the expression of specific genes with complementary nucleotide sequences by degrading mRNA after transcription, preventing translation.
siRNA

What does ``siRNA'' abbreviate?
small interfering RNA

What does ``RISC'' abbreviate?
RNA-induced silencing complex

On what lake is Barry's Bay?
Kamaniskeg Lake

What protein family plays a central role in RNA silencing processes as essential components of the RISC? It encodes for six characteristic domains: N-terminal (N), Linker-1 (L1), PAZ, Linker-2 (L2), Mid, and a C-terminal PIWI domain.
argonaute

What oil painting by Laurent de La Hire dated to 1650, is in a private collection and features the Rod of Asclepius?
Rhetoric

Who canonized St. Bonaventure?
Sixtus IV

Which popes were part of the Della Rovere family? 
Sixtus IV, Julius II

What soft felt or wool conical headdress fit closely around the head and was characterized by a pointed crown that curls forward?
Phrygian cap

What type of censer or incense burner was used in the Mediterranean region since antiquity? Its name comes from the Greek for ``to smoke.''
thymiaterion

What yearly literary anthology was published from 1895 to 1914?
The Bibelot 

Who is the patron saint of Bologna? The city's Piazza Maggiore is dominated by a church named after him.
St. Petronius

What is the metal seal of a bull called?
bulla

What does ``SPASPE'' abbreviate?
Sanctus PAulus et Sanctus PEtrus

Where was Paul going when he converted?
Damascus

Whom does the Conversion on the Way to Damascus portray?
Paul

``There is also a correspondence between the detachment of the [---] figure from the mother archetype . . . and the detachment of the transformative character from the elementary character.''
anima

Define ``assail.''
make a concerted or violent attack on

Where is the Pont Saint-Bénézet?
Avignon

What river did the Pont Saint-Bénézet span?
Rhône

What is Ontario's bird?
common loon

What is Gavia immer?
common loon

Who sculpted Christus in the Copenhagen Cathedral?
Betel Thorvaldsen

Where is Cyrene?
Libya

Name the Nusa Tenggara Islands from west to east.
Bali, Lombok, Sumbawa, Flores, Sumba, Savu, Rote, Timor, Atauro, Alor archipelago, Barat Daya Islands, Tanimbar Islands 

What name given to the historic centre of Besançon comes from the shape that the Doubs gives it?
La Boucle

What is the largest governorate of Oman?
Dhofar

Who wrote SICP?
Harold Abelson, Gerald Jay Sussman, Julie Sussman

What does ``SICP'' abbreviate?
Structure and interpretation of computer programs

With what language does SICP teach computer science?
Lisp

Where was Robert Silverman born?
Montreal

What is Robert Silverman's occupation?
pianist

What was Rostislav Dubinsky's occupation?
violinist

Who were the original members of the Borodin Quartet?
Mstislav Rostropovich, Rostislav Dubinsky, Vladimir Rabei, Yuri Nikolaevsky

What is ``More people have been in Paris than I have'' an example of?
comparative illusion

What is an Escher sentence?
comparative illusion

With whom did Santana collaborate on ``Smooth''?
Rob Thomas

What band won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year in 2000?
Santana

What name is associated with the impossible staircase?
Penrose

What do Bach's Canon per tonos, Escher's paintings Drawing hands and Ascending and descending, the liar paradox, Penrose stairs, the uroboros, and the Shepard tone exemplify?
strange loop

What is the addition of a poly(A) tail to an RNA transcript?
polyadenylation

What does ``RAS'' abbreviate?
RAt Sarcoma virus

After St. Peter, whose papacy was the longest?
Pius IX

Who played Alison Parker on Melrose Place?
Courtney Thorne-Smith

What ondist, whose brother invented her instrument, was the ondist in the first performance of Messiaen's Turangalîla?
Ginette Martenot

What does ``UML'' abbreviate?
Unified Modeling Language

Where was Uma Thurman born?
Boston

Where was Marc-André Hamelin born?
Montreal

What is Marc-André Hamelin's occupation?
pianist

What is the statistical estimate of whether two genetic loci are physically near enough to each other (or ``linked'') on a particular chromosome that they are likely to be inherited together?
LOD score

What does ``LOD'' abbreviate?
logarithm of the odds

What two highways go through Rocky Mountain House?
Highway 11, Highway 22

Where was Joseph Silverman born?
New York City

What is Joseph Silverman's alma mater?
Harvard University

Who advised Joseph Silverman?
John Tate

What is Rudavoi?
river

Where was Max Stern born?
Fulda

Where is Bryggen?
Bergen

Whose elementary proof of Dirichlet's theorem about primes in an arithmetic progression was published in the Annals of Mathematics in 1949?
Atle Selberg

Who wrote The Green Mile?
Stephen King

Who directed The Green Mile?
Frank Darabont

Who plays Paul Edgecomb in The Green Mile?
Tom Hanks

When was Armageddon released?
1998

Who directed Armageddon?
Michael Bay

Who stars in Armageddon?
Bruce Willis

Who wrote Sense and Sensibility?
Jane Austen

What follows Sense and Sensibility?
Pride and Prejudice

Where is Iroquois Ridge High School?
Oakville, Ontario

Where is A. N. Myer Secondary School?
Niagara Falls, Ontario

What is encoded by the bcd maternal effect gene in Drosophilia? It was the first protein demonstrated to act as a morphogen.
homeotic protein bicoid

What does ``IGF-2'' abbreviate?
insulin-like growth factor 2

Whose downfall necessitated the Congress of Vienna?
Napoleon

What are the three principal endopeptidases in the human digestive system?
chymotrypsin, pepsin, trypsin

What stochastic matrix did the PageRank algorithm use?
Google matrix

What is $\alpha$ in the PageRank algorithm?
damping factor

What is 2,4-Diamin?
herbicide

What is Cyprinus carpio?
common carp

What proto-oncogenic tumour suppressor protein is dysfunctional in several major cancers? One of its functions is to prevent excessive cell growth by inhibiting cell cycle progression until a cell is ready to divide. When the cell is ready to divide, this protein is phosphorylated, inactivating it, and the cell cycle is allowed to progress. It is also a recruiter of several chromatin remodelling enzymes such as methylases and acetylases. When it is mutated, it becomes nonfunctional and cannot inhibit the expression of E2F, whence it is always active, driving the cell cycle to progress from G1 to S phase, and cell growth and division are unregulated, causing tumour formation in the eye.
retinoblastoma protein (pRB)

What does ``Rb'' abbreviate?
retinoblastoma

What is pRB?
retinoblastoma protein

What describes itself as a ``UNIX-based software package for instrument control and data acquisition widely used for X-ray diffraction at synchrotrons around the world and in university, national and industrial laboratories''?
spec

Who wrote ``Space oddity''?
David Bowie

Who says ``ground control to Major Tom''?
David Bowie

Who wrote the song ``You're my best friend''?
Queen

Who wrote ``Cupid's chokehold''?
Gym Class Heroes

Who recorded ``Baba O'Riley''?
The Who

What is the real name of ``Teenage wasteland''?
``Baba O'Riley''

Who talks about ``any white guy in 1985''?
Bo Burnham

What protein secreted by the Sertoli cells in men and by the granulosa cells in women inhibits the synthesis and release of the follicle-stimulating hormone in the pituitary gland and reduces the hypothalamic LH--releasing hormone content? It also inhibits the multiplication of spermatogonia in male gonads and the production of progesterone by the ovaries.
inhibin

What French exclamation has its origin in the French for ``holy God!''?
sacrebleu

What transliteration system for Mandarin Chinese also called ``Zhuyin'' consists of 37 characters and five tone marks?
bopomofo

What is GB2312?
key official character set of the People's Republic of China used for Simplified Chinese characters

What is the figure-figure sequence an example of?
Hofstadter sequence

How many letters does the Burmese alphabet have?
33

What river passes Surgut?
Ob

What river passes Yakutsk?
Lena

What river passes Khabarovsk?
Amur

What is the capital of Acre?
Rio Branco

What is the capital of Alagoas?
Maceió

What is the capital of Amapá?
Macapá

What is the capital of Amazonas?
Manaus

What is the capital of Bahia?
Salvador

What is the capital of Ceará?
Fortaleza

What is the capital of Espírito Santo?
Vitória

What is the capital of Goiás?
Goiânia

What is the capital of Maranhão?
São Luís

What is the capital of Mato Grosso?
Cuiabá

What is the capital of Mato Grosso do Sul?
Campo Grande

What is the capital of Minas Gerais?
Belo Horizonte

What is the capital of Pará?
Belém

What is the capital of Paraíba?
João Pessoa

What is the capital of Paraná?
Curitiba

What is the capital of Pernambuco?
Recife

What is the capital of Piauí?
Teresina

What is the capital of Rio Grande do Norte?
Natal

What is the capital of Rio Grande do Sul?
Porto Alegre

What is the capital of Rondônia?
Porto Velho

What is the capital of Roraima?
Boa Vista

What is the capital of Santa Catarina?
Florianópolis

What is the capital of Sergipe?
Aracaju

What is the capital of Tocantins?
Palmas

Who was the last pope in the Papal States?
Pius IX

What is the biggest city in the Peruvian Amazon?
Iquitos

Where is Kirkenes?
north-east Norway

What is the easternmost Norwegian town?
Vardø

What is the northernmost Brazilian town?
Uiramutã

What is the largest settlement in the Vestfirðir peninsula?
Ísafjörður

What massive peninsula in north-west Iceland faces Greenland and is noted for its dramatic landscapes?
Westfjords

What is the largest settlement in the Westfjords?
Ísafjörður

What is the southernmost settlement in Iceland?
Vík

What island contains Iceland's northernmost settlement?
Grímsey

What is Iceland's highest peak?
Hvannadalshnjúkur

What national park is home to Iceland's highest peak, Hvannadalshnjúkur?
Vatnajökull National Park

What bank of gravel and silt do some consider to be the northernmost point of land on earth?
Oodaaq

What island is home to Russia's northernmost military base, Nagurskoye?
Alexandra Land

What is the northernmost permanent civilian settlement?
Ny-Ålesund

What is the southernmost settlement in the world?
Puerto Williams

What is New Zealand's southernmost settlement?
Bluff

What is New Zealand's third largest island?
Stewart Island

Where was Volodymyr Zelenskyy born?
Kryvyi Rih, Ukraine

What adjective describes a path in a graph that visits each node exactly once?
Hamiltonian

From what did Myc get its name?
Myelocytomatosis 

To what does the gene c-myc contribute?
cancer

What does ``bHLH'' abbreviate
basic helix-loop-helix

What does ``ARNTL'' abbreviate?
aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator-like protein 1

What does ``BMAL1'' abbreviate?
brain and muscle ARNT-like 1

What gene encoding a bHLH-PAS transcription factor first identified in 1997 by Dr. Joseph Takahashi et al. plays a major role as an activator of downstream elements in the pathway critical to the generation of circadian rhythms?
CLOCK

What does ``CLOCK'' abbreviate (genetics)?
circadian locomotor output cycles kaput

What is the DNA sequence of an E-box?
CANNTG

On what chromosome is SIRT1 located in humans?
10

What does ``HEY2'' abbreviate?
hairy/enhancer-of-split related with YRPW motif protein 2

What does ``PPARGC'' abbreviate?
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator

What does ``ERRα'' abbreviate?
estrogen-related receptor alpha

What does ``AIRE'' abbreviate?
autoimmune regulator

On what chromosome is AIRE?
21

On what chromosome band is AIRE?
21q22.3

On what chromosome is p53?
17

Who wrote God and man at Yale?
William F. Buckley

Where is Å, Andøy?
Norway

What is the Hebrew translation of ``priest''?
kohen

What is the minimum time required for an electric current to double the strength of the rheobase to stimulate a muscle or a neuron?
chronaxie

Who talks about optimal grip?
John Vervaeke

What is the ratio of the focal length to the diameter of the entrance pupil? 
f-number

How does one say ``egg tart'' in Chinese?
蛋撻 (dan ta)

What is 蛋撻?
egg tart

Where is Jalal-Abad?
Kyrgyzstan

To what phylum do flatworms belong?
Platyhelminthes

What creatures comprise the phylum Platyhelminthes?
flatworms

What is the implicit memory phenomenon in which people mistakenly believe that a current thought or idea is a product of their own creation when, in fact, they have encountered it previously and then forgotten it?
cryptomnesia

What traditional South American caffeine-rich infused herbal drink is made by soaking dried leaves of the yerba [---] (Ilex paraguariensis) in hot water and is traditionally served with a metal straw (bombilla) in a container typically made from a calabash gourd (also called the [---]), but also in some areas made from a cattle horn (guampa)?
mate

What structure forms the floor of the longitudinal fissure that separates the two cerebral hemispheres? 
corpus callosum

Where is Tacna?
south Peru

To what class do the chitons belong?
Polyplacophora

What ceremonial cap of crimson velvet lined with ermine (chapeau gules turned up ermine) is worn or carried by certain persons as a sign of nobility or special honour?
cap of maintenance

For what is Beauchamp--Feuillet notation used?
dance

What squat bottle enclosed in a straw basket was used for Chianti wine traditionally?
fiasco

What does ``ROV'' abbreviate?
remotely operated vehicle

What lake is beside Lake Musters?
Lake Colhué Huapí

What lake is beside Lake Colhué Huapí?
Lake Musters

Where is Copernicus's most famous portrait from? 
Toruń

What is the motto of the College of Arms?
diligent and secret

Where is Abisko?
Lapland, Sweden

What is Sakhalin's principal city?
Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk

Whose painting inspired Fiddler on the roof?
Marc Chagall

What name is given to a wine of German origin or style of superior or reserve quality, especially one made from a specified quality of grape must, without added sugar?
Kabinett

What name is given to a wine of German origin or style of superior or reserve quality, especially one made from a specified quality of grape must, without added sugar? The name comes from the German for ``chamber wine.''
Kabinett

What white wine of German origin or style is made from grapes harvested late in the season?
Spätlese

What white wine of German origin or style is made from grapes harvested late in the season? Its name comes from the German for ``late'' plus ``picking.''
Spätlese

What white wine of German origin or style is made from selected bunches of grapes picked later than the general harvest? 
Auslese

What white wine of German origin or style is made from selected bunches of grapes picked later than the general harvest? Its name comes from the German for ``out'' plus ``picking.''
Auslese

Where is Great Bitter Lake?
Egypt

To what lake does the Suez Canal connect the Mediterranean Sea?
Great Bitter Lake

What is the only king without a mustache?
king of hearts

What canton contains Chur?
Grisons

What is the German name for Grisons?
Graubünden

What is the French name for Graubünden?
Grisons

What is a bier?
movable frame on which a coffin or a corpse is placed before burial or cremation or on which they are carried to the grave

What are the two principal histone acetyltransferase families?
GNATs, MYSTs

What does ``GNAT'' abbreviate (genetics)?
Gcn5-related N-acetyltransferases

What does ``MYST'' abbreviate (genetics)?
Moz, Ybf2/Sas3, Sas2, Tip60

What short-stemmed glass whose vessel has a wide bottom and a relatively narrow top is used mostly to serve aged brown liquors such as bourbon, brandy, and whisky? 
snifter

What region that produces a distinctive brandy lies between the Adour and Garonne rivers in the foothills of the Pyrenees? 
Armagnac

What are the ``big four'' cognac houses?
Courvoisier, Hennessy, Martell, Rémy Martin

What body of water borders Sovetskaya Gavan's port?
Strait of Tartary

What Boston bridge that spans the Charles River has the colloquial name ``salt-and-pepper bridge''?
Longfellow Bridge

How many prefectures are in Shikoku?
four

What prefectures are in Shikoku?
Ehime, Kagawa, Kochi, Tokushima

How many prefectures does Japan have?
47

What fungal metabolites can bind to actin filaments and block polymerization and the elongation of actin?
cytochalasin

What is 長城?
Great Wall of China

What operating system's code contained the comment ``you are not expected to understand''?
Unix 6

Where do meiosis and the creation of spermatozoa happen?
seminiferous tubule

What is the Markov property?
memoryless property (of a stochastic process)

Where is Talca?
Chile

What dual-defence model explains how people protect themselves against concerns about death (mortality salience)?
terror management theory

Who designed Objective-C?
Tom Love, Brad Cox

What is the $Y$-combinator?
$Y = \lambda f.(\lambda x. f(x\ x)) (\lambda x.f(x\ x))$

What did Operation Laylat al-Qadr target?
Deir ez-Zor

Where is Domenico di Michelino's fresco of Dante holding the Divine comedy?
Florence Cathedral

What band says ``domo arigato, Mr. Roboto''?
Styx

What was the title of Argentina's de facto song at the 2022 World Cup?
``Muchachos''

Recite the lyrics to Argentina's 2022 World Cup song ``Muchachos.''
En Argentina nací / Tierra del Diego y Lionel / De los pibes de Malvinas / Que jamás olvidaré / No te lo puedo explicar / Porque no vas a entender / Las finales que perdimos / Cuantos años la lloré / Pero eso se terminó / Porque en el Maracaná / La final con los brazucas / La volvió a ganar papá / Muchachos / Ahora nos volvimos a ilusionar / Quiero ganar la tercera / Quiero ser campeón mundial / Y al Diego / Desde el cielo lo podemos ver / Con Don Diego y La Tota / Alentándolo a Lionel / Muchachos / Ahora nos volvimos a ilusionar / Quiero ganar la tercera / Quiero ser campeón mundial / Y al Diego / Desde el cielo lo podemos ver / Con Don Diego y La Tota / Alentándolo a Lionel, y ser campeones otra vez, y ser campeones otra vez

Give a blazon of Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes's coat of arms.
Écartelé : au premier d’or au gonfanon de gueules bordé de sinople (Auvergne) ; au deuxième de gueules à la croix d’argent (Savoie) ; au troisième de gueules au lion d’argent (Lyonnais) ; au quatrième d’or au dauphin d’azur, crêté, barbé, loré, peautré et oreillé de gueules (Dauphiné).

Give a blazon of Bourgogne-Franche-Comté's coat of arms.
Ecartelé, au 1 : d’azur semé de lis d’or à la bordure componée d’argent et de gueules (Bourgogne moderne) ; aux 2 et 3 : d’azur semé de billettes d’or à un lion d’or, armé et lampassé de gueules (Franche-Comté) ; au 4 : bandé d’or et d’azur de six pièces à la bordure de gueules (Bourgogne ancien).

What was the blazon that Jacques Meurgey gave Normandy's coat of arms?
De gueules aux deux léopards d'or, armés et lampassés d'azur, passant l'un sur l'autre.

Give a blazon of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur's coat of arms.
Parti, au premier d'or aux quatre pals de gueules (de Provence) et au second coupé d'or au dauphin d'azur crêté, barbé, loré, peautré et oreillé de gueules (du Dauphiné) et d'argent à l'aigle couronné de gueules, empiétant une montagne aux trois coupeaux de sable issant d'une mer d'azur et ondée d'argent (du Comté de Nice).

Who wrote Humanae vitae?
Paul VI

Who canonized John Henry Newman?
Francis

What was John Henry Newman's alma mater?
Trinity College, Oxford University

What highways pass through Logan Lake?
97C, 97D

What is a stochastic matrix?
rows/columns sum to one

Who wrote Caritas in veritate?
Benedict XVI

From Francis back, who were the last ten popes?
Francis, Benedict XVI, John Paul II, John Paul I, Paul VI, John XXIII, Pius XII, Pius XI, Benedict XV, Pius X

Who wrote The hockey sweater?
Roch Carrier

What is the easternmost of the Canary Islands?
Lanzarote

What is a mesa?
isolated flat-topped hill with steep sides, as found in arid and semi-arid areas of the United States

What is the opposite of oriental?
occidental

What are the five rivers of Punjab?
Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, Sutlej, and Beas

What does ``Punjab'' mean?
land of five waters

What is Balochistan's capital?
Quetta

What is the largest of the Queen Elizabeth Islands?
Ellesmere Island

What is the largest of the Sverdrup Islands?
Axel Heiberg

What is the second largest island of the Sverdrup Islands?
Ellef Ringnes

What is the third largest island of the Sverdrup Islands?
Amund Ringnes

Where is Quilmes?
Argentina

What Mexican state is bordered by Hidalgo, San Luis Potosí, Guanajuato, Michoacán, and México?
Querétaro

What is Kyrgyzstan's currency?
som

What two countries fused to create Tanzania?
Tanganyika, Zanzibar

Where is the Valley of the Kings?
Luxor

What is the most populated city in Westphalia?
Dortmund

What is the largest river that flows into the Arctic Ocean?
Yenisei

Complete the name: ``Yorkshire and the [---].''
Humber

What is the capital of Overjissel?
Zwolle

What province contains Zhengzhou?
Henan

What is the last Mexican state alphabetically?
Zacatecas

What is the first Mexican state alphabetically?
Aguascalientes

What was Wales's Latin name?
Cambria

What does the Comstock--Needham system name?
insect wing veins 

What is the Scottish word for whisky?
usquebaugh

What does ``usquebaugh'' mean?
whisky

Where is the Jasna Góra Monastery?
Częstochowa

How do you pronounce ``Częstochowa''?
ˌCHestəˈKHōvə

Where is the Black Madonna ikon?
Jasna Góra, Częstochowa

What was Dnipro's name before 2016?
Dnipropetrovsk

To what was Dnipropetrovsk's name changed?
Dnipro

What is the Mar de Hoces?
Drake Passage

What is the Spanish name for the Drake Passage?
Mar de Hoces

Who painted Barbe des combats?
Jean Dubuffet

What river that rises in the Valdai Hills of Russia flows through Belarus and Latvia and into the Gulf of Riga (that is, the Baltic Sea)?
Daugava

Where is the mouth of the Daugava?
Gulf of Riga

What does ``ein sof'' mean?
the infinite

What name is given in Kabbalah to God transcendent, in His pure essence: God in Himself, apart from His relationship to the created world?
ein sof

What does the principle of plenitude state?
the universe is ``full,'' exhibiting the maximal diversity of kinds of existences; everything possible exists

What concept states that the universe is ``full,'' exhibiting the maximal diversity of kinds of existences --- that everything possible exists?
principle of plenitude

What factor of an automorphic factor extends the notion of a modular form?
nebentypus

What was Domenikos Theotokópoulos's byname?
El Greco

Whose byname was ``El Greco''?
Domenikos Theotokópoulos

What body of water contains the island of Trischen?
Meldorf Bay

What motif is on the flag of the Isle of Man?
triskelion

What name describes a human figure in art that spirals around a central axis so that the lower limbs face in one direction and the torso almost in the opposite direction, in a graceful if sometimes contorted pose? The development of this pose is attributed to Michelangelo in his statue of Victory, but an earlier example can be seen in Raphael's Saint Catherine of Alexandria. The pose is principally associated with Mannerist art, and one can see examples in the figure of Deceit in Bronzino's An Allegory with Venus and Cupid and Saint John in Parmigianino's Madonna and Child with Saints.
figura serpentinata

Who promulgated the encyclical Musicae sacrae?
Pius XII

What percent of cancers have shortened tails?
91

What is Sam Bankman-Fried's alma mater?
MIT

On what day did Orson Bean enter the world?
22 July 1928

What was Wilhelm Reich's ``field of expertise''?
psychoanalysis

Who plays playing Mark S. in the TV series Severance?
Adam Scott

When was the film The Best Years of Our Lives released?
1946

What film starred Myrna Loy, Fredric March, Dana Andrews, Teresa Wright, and Virginia Mayo?
The Best Years of Our Lives

What was the greatest year in film?
1939

When was the film Gone with the Wind released?
1939

When was the film The Wizard of Oz released?
1939

What historical mini-series stars Jared Harris, Stellan Skarsgård, and Paul Ritter?
Chernobyl

When was the film Battleground released?
1949

Who directed Battleground?
William Wellman

What American television western that aired on CBS for 20 seasons (1955-–75) became the longest-running prime-time television western in history?
Gunsmoke

Where was Gunsmoke set?
Dodge City

Who directed Pleasantville?
Gary Ross

Who starred in Pleasantville?
Tobey Maguire

When was Pleasantville released?
1998

When was Top Gun: Maverick released?
2022

Who stars in Top Gun: Maverick?
Tom Cruise

Who authored No country for old men?
Cormac McCarthy

What Cormac McCarthy novel was adapted into a film that won Best Picture?
No Country for Old Men

What film won Best Picture in 2007?
No Country for Old Men

Who wrote American Pastoral?
Philip Roth

What pope talked about the ``principle of totality,'' which was referenced in Paul VI's Humanae vitae?
Pius XII

What is another name for an epitope?
antigenic determinant

What part of an antigen is recognized by antibodies, B cells, or T cells?
epitope

What are elements of $\mathbf{Q}(\sqrt{-7})$ called?
Kleinian integers

What city will replace Malabo as Equatorial Guinea's capital?
Ciudad de la Paz

What city will replace Jakarta as Indonesia's capital?
Nusantara

Which month of the French Republican calendar ran from 21 March to 19 April?
Germinal

Where were Zdeno Chara and Marian Gaborik born?
Trenčín

What disruption of heart rhythm occurs as a result of a blow to the precordial region at a critical time during the cycle of a heartbeat?
commotio cordis

Which month of the French Republican calendar was the title of an Émile Zola novel?
Germinal

What border do the cities Chuí and Chuy straddle? Name the countries.
Brazil, Uruguay

What is the natural generalization of Brownian motion to $d$-time?
Gaussian free field

Let $X_0$ be a separated scheme of finite type on $\mathbf{F}_{p^f}$. Let $\mathscr{F}_0$ be a constructible $\mathbf{Q}_{\ell}$-sheaf on $X_0$. What is Grothendieck's expression for $L(X_0,\mathscr{F}_0)$, from which the trace formula is derived? (SGA 4 1/2 86)
\begin{align*}L(X_0,\mathscr{F}_0) = \prod_i \det(1 - F^*t^f,  H_c^i (X,\mathscr{F}))^{(-1)^{i+1}}\end{align*}

Who promulgated the encyclical Aeterni Patris?
Leo XIII

Who promulgated the encyclical Fides et ratio?
John Paul II

What is the collection of rules for pronunciation in reciting the Quran?
tajwid

What order of annelid worms in the class Polycheata comprises filter feeders with no buccal organ?
Sabellida

What pope granted Christopher Columbus and the House of Colon a coat of arms motu proprio?
Alexander VI

What is a papal document personally signed by the pope to signify his special interest in the subject, less formal than constitutions and carrying no papal seal? Its name means ``on one's own initiative.''
motu proprio 

What is the highway code of the Egnatia Odos?
A2

What is the Greek A2 called?
Egnatia Odos

What three sections stratify lakes?
epilimnion, metalimnion, hypolimnion

What cluster of muscles is located on the radial portion of the volar hand at the base of the thumb?
thenar eminence

What three muscles comprise the thenar eminence?
abductor pollicis brevis, flexor pollicis brevis, opponens pollicis

What is the Greek word for ``palm of the hand''?
thenar

What actor starred in Happy Gilmore?
Adam Sandler

What actor starred in Billy Madison?
Adam Sandler

What year beheld Adam Sandler's birth?
1966

Which was the seventh month of the French Republican calendar?
Germinal

Who played Ron Burgundy?
Will Ferrell

Who played Buddy the elf?
Will Ferrell

Which month of the French Republican calendar ran from 20 March to 19 May?
Floréal

Who played Ace Ventura?
Jim Carrey

Who played Bruce Nolan in Bruce Almighty?
Jim Carrey

Who starred in the film Gulliver's Travels?
Jack Black

Where was John Candy born?
Toronto

Who starred in Planes, trains, and automobiles?
John Candy

Who starred in Night at the Museum?
Ben Stiller

Who played Michael Scott in The office?
Steve Carell

Where was Steve Carell born?
Concord, Massachusetts

Who starred in movies like Patch Adams, Mrs. Doubtfire, Jumanji, [Good Morning, Vietnam], Dead Poets Society, and The Fisher King?
Robin Williams

Where was Robin Williams born?
Chicago

What coal-mining town in the Komi Republic, Russia, is situated just north of the Arctic Circle in the Pechora coal basin?
Vorkuta

For what CHL team did Connor Bedard play?
Regina Pats

On what team did Connor Bedard score in overtime to send Canada to the semifinals of the 2023 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships?
Slovakia

Where was Connor Bedard born?
North Vancouver

Who won the 2022 World Cup?
Argentina

How many goals did Lionel Messi score in the 2022 World Cup final?
2

How many goals did Kylian Mbappé score in the 2022 World Cup final?
3

In what minute did Lionel Messi put Argentina up 3 goals to 2 in the 2022 World Cup final?
108

In what minute did Kylian Mbappé make the score 3--3 in the 2022 World Cup final?
118

Which two French players missed penalties in the 2022 World Cup final?
Kingsley Coman, Aurélien Tchouaméni

Which two French players scored penalties in the 2022 World Cup final?
Kylian Mbappé, Randal Kolo Muani

Which four Argentinian players scored penalties in the 2022 World Cup final?
Lionel Messi, Paulo Dybala, Leandro Paredes, Gonzalo Montiel

List the goal scorers and times in the 2022 World Cup final in chronological order.
Messi (23), Di María (36), Mbappé (80), Mbappé (81), Messi (108), Mbappé (118)

What was Sidney Crosby's junior team?
Rimouski Océanic

What was Patrick Kane's junior team?
London Knights

What was Scott Niedermayer's junior team?
Kamloops Blazers

What was Wayne Gretzky's junior team?
Sault Ste. Marie Greyhounds

Translate: ``pulsate et aperietur vobis.''
knock, and it shall be opened unto you

What is oikophobia?
dislike of one's own culture or compatriot

What types of creatures comprise the family Alpheidae?
asymmetrical snapping shrimp

What landscape of Brazil --- which covers 21\% of Brazil's land area --- is characterized by extensive savanna formations intercepted by woods along the rivers, at the bottom of valleys?
cerrado

Where is Mooney's Bay?
Ottawa

Which was the eighth month of the French Republican calendar?
Floréal

What post did Harold Bloom hold at Yale University?
Sterling Professor of Humanities

Who wrote The Western canon, speaking of the ``School of Resentment''?
Harold Bloom

Which month of the French Republican calendar ran from 20 May to 18 June?
Prairial

Which was the ninth month of the French Republican calendar?
Prairial

What was Wayne Gretzky's atom team?
Brantford Nadrofsky Steelers

What is the rule that a pawn making a first move of two squares instead of one may nevertheless be immediately captured by an opposing pawn on the fifth rank?
en passant rule

What basketball player was nicknamed ``the logo''?
Jerry West

What narrow and steep-sided ravine marks the course of a fast stream?
gulch

What is a gulch?
narrow and steep-sided ravine marking the course of a fast stream

From what piece was the theme of Benjamin Britten's The young person's guide to the orchestra?
Abdelazer suite

From whom does Thomism come?
St. Thomas Aquinas

Define ``polemical.''
expressing or constituting a strongly critical attack on or controversial opinion about someone or something

``The axiom of criticism must be not that the poet does not know what he is talking about but that he cannot talk about what he knows.'' Who said this?
Northrop Frye

``But we have no clear notion of progress in the criticism of Shakespeare, or of how a critic who read all his predecessors could, as a result, become anything better than a monument of contemporary taste, with all its limitations and prejudices.'' Who said this?
Northrop Frye

What piece of music might you associate with ``1 1 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 6 8''?
Turangalîla-symphonie

What Russian resort town on the Black Sea is very close to Georgia?
Adler

What was the detailed study of the shape and size of the cranium as a supposed indication of character and mental abilities?
phrenology

What is the branch of knowledge that deals with the structure, historical development, and relationships of a language or languages?
philology

What is philology?
the branch of knowledge that deals with the structure, historical development, and relationships of a language or languages

What province is home to Izegem?
West Flanders

Where is Ieper?
West Flanders

What is the French name for Roeselare?
Roulers

What city sees the meeting of the Amazon and Tapajós?
Santarém

What island noted for its water buffalo population separates the Pará River from the greater Amazon River system?
Marajó

From where is the Brisa Maracujá drink?
Madeira

Where is Patek Philippe centred?
Geneva

What family took ownership of Patek Philippe in 1932?
Stern

What non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (C14H14O3) is used for inflammatory diseases, pain, dysmenorrhoea, and fever?
naproxen

What large canopied tree native to most of Africa, primarily to the savanna and Sahel, is classified as ``Vachellia tortilis''?
umbrella thorn acacia

What river runs beside Shushtalep?
Kondoma

Into what river does the Kondoma flow in Novokuznetsk?
Tom

What city is north of Shushtalep?
Novokuznetsk

What is the second largest island of Metro France?
Oléron

What two islands comprised the Vacetae Insulae?
Oléron, Ré

What highway forms the Brazilian part of the Interoceanic Highway?
BR-364

What is Araucaria angustifolia?
Paraná pine

What is the scientific name for the Paraná pine?
Araucaria angustifolia

What is Copernicia prunifera?
carnaúba palm

What state does the carnaúba palm symbolize?
Ceará

What tree symbolizes Ceará?
carnaúba palm

What is Mauritia flexuosa?
moriche palm

What palm tree is common in the Amazon?
moriche palm

What is Attalea speciosa?
babaçu

What is the scientific name for the babaçu?
Attalea speciosa

What tree is common in Maranhão?
babaçu

What is Euterpe oleracea?
açaí palm

What is the scientific name for the açaí palm?
Euterpe oleracea

What is Cortaderia selloana?
pampas grass 

What is the scientific name for pampas grass?
Cortaderia selloana

Can you find Eucalyptus grandis in Brazil (2023)?
yes

What is Syagrus oleracea?
guariroba

What is the scientific name for the guariroba?
Syagrus oleracea

What is Hevea brasiliensis?
Pará rubber tree

What is the sharinga tree?
Pará rubber tree

What is the scientific name for the Pará rubber tree?
Hevea brasiliensis

What is Bertholletia excelsa?
Brazil nut tree

What is the scientific name for the Brazil nut tree?
Bertholletia excelsa

What is a flat $R$-module?
$R$-module $M$ where $- \otimes_R M$ preserves injectivity

What is a faithfully flat $R$-module?
$R$-module $M$ where a sequence is exact if and only if that sequence tensored with $M$ is exact

Who was the seventh premier of Saskatchewan (1944--1961)?
Tommy Douglas

Who was the first leader of the NDP?
Tommy Douglas

Who wrote ``Fly at Night''?
Chilliwack

How should ``souvlaki'' be spelled?
soublaki

Sidney Crosby: lefty or righty?
lefty

Connor McDavid: lefty or righty?
lefty

Wayne Gretzky: lefty or righty?
lefty

Alexander Ovechkin: lefty or righty?
righty

Evgeni Malkin: lefty or righty?
lefty

Who is Geno?
Evgeni Malkin

Nathan MacKinnon: lefty or righty?
righty

Patrice Bergeron: lefty or righty?
righty

Jonathan Toews: lefty or righty?
righty

Who is Captain Serious?
Jonathan Toews

Jarome Iginla: lefty or righty?
righty

Steven Stamkos: lefty or righty?
righty

What hockey player's nickname is also a verb meaning ``speak with sudden involuntary pauses and a tendency to repeat the initial letters of words''?
Steven Stamkos

What was Steven Stamkos's junior team?
Sarnia Sting

What was Steven Stamkos's minor team?
Markham Waxers

Nikita Kucherov: lefty or righty?
lefty

Zdeno Chára: lefty or righty?
lefty

Daniel Alfredsson: lefty or righty?
righty

Vladimir Tarasenko: lefty or righty?
lefty

When did the St. Louis Blues win the Stanley Cup?
2019

Where was Pelé born?
Três Corações

What saint offered his life to God for Pope Leo XII?
St. Vincenzo Strambi

Who wrote Récoltes et semailles?
Alexander Grothendieck

What are Grothendieck's six operations?
direct image, inverse image, proper direct image, proper inverse image, internal tensor product, internal Hom

What does ``ERH'' abbreviate?
enhancer of rudimentary homologue

Who conducted the premiere of Messiaen's Saint François d'Assise?
Seiji Ozawa

When was the premiere of Messiaen's Saint François d'Assise?
28 November 1983

Who played Saint François in the premiere of Messiaen's Saint François d'Assise?
José Van Dam

Where did Messiaen's Saint François d'Assise premiere?
Palais Garnier

What is the left adjoint to the inclusion functor from the category of compact Hausdorff topological spaces to the category of topological spaces?
Stone--Čech compactification functor

What is the left adjoint to the inclusion functor from the category of sheaves on X to the category of presheaves on X?
sheafification functor

What is the left adjoint to the inclusion functor from the category of fields to the category of integral domains (where the maps are injective ring homomorphisms)?
field of fractions functor

What do left adjoints preserve?
colimits

To what is tensoring left adjoint?
Hom 

What does ``C. elegans'' abbreviate?
Caenorhabditis elegans

Who hosted CBC Radio One's Cross country checkup?
Rex Murphy

Is 91 a prime number?
no

What is an apple in hockey?
assist

What Indonesian province is on the southern tip of Sumatra?
Lampung

What does Zorn's lemma say about a partially ordered set $P$?
if every chain in $P$ has an upper bound in $P$, then $P$ contains a maximal element

What is Rainbolt's first name?
Trevor

What was Messiaen's last work?
Éclairs sur l'au-delà . . .

For what instruments was Fête des belles eaux written?
six ondes Martenots

By what gene is CAAX prenyl protease 2 encoded?
RCE1

By what gene is protein-S-isoprenylcysteine O-methyltransferase encoded?
ICMT

Translate: ``Et Dieu essuiera toute larme de leurs yeux.''
And God will wipe every tear from their eyes

What does ``SNCF'' abbreviate?
Société nationale des chemins de fer français

What is vitamin B7's other name?
biotin

Nick Lidström: lefty or righty?
lefty

Let $R$ be a ring. Let $A$ and $B$ be $R$-modules. What is $\operatorname{Ext}_R^0(A,B)$?
$\operatorname{Hom}_R(A,B)$

Let $R$ be a ring. Let $A$ and $B$ be $R$-modules. What is $\operatorname{Tor}_R^0(A,B)$?
$A\otimes_R B$

Let $\omega$ be the canonical sheaf. What does Serre duality say?
$H^i(X,\mathscr{F})  \cong H^{n-i} (X, \mathscr{F}^* \otimes \omega)^*$

Where was Jean-Louis Koszul born?
Strasbourg

What ``character'' to the units of the $p$-adic integers takes a number $x$ to a ``representative'' that is $x$ mod $p$ and a $p$th root of unity? It also has a limit definition.
Teichmüller character

Who was the seventeenth premier of Ontario?
John Robarts

Of what party was John Robarts a member?
Progressive Conservative

Where was Kevin Hayes born?
Dorchester, MA

Whose memoir based The wolf of Wall Street?
Jordan Belfort

What is Fratercula arctica?
Atlantic puffin

What did Andrés Iniesta's 2010 World Cup Final undershirt say?
DANI JARQUE SIEMPRE CON NOSOTROS

What aromatic Eurasian plant of the rue family, with showy white flowers and fragrant leaves that emit a flammable vapour, can sometimes be ignited without harming the plant?
gas plant

What is Dictamnus albus?
gas plant

What is fraxinella?
gas plant

What is gasconade?
extravagant boasting

What region and former province of south-western France, in the northern foothills of the Pyrenees, was held by England between 1154 and 1453?
Gascony

What is the muscular part of the hind leg of a horse between the stifle and the hock?
gaskin

(1592--1655) What French astronomer and philosopher is best known for his atomic theory of matter, which was based on his interpretation of the works of Epicurus?
Pierre Gassendi

(1888--1963) What American physiologist used an oscilloscope to show that the velocity of a nerve impulse is proportional to the diameter of the fibre in collaboration with Joseph Erlanger? He won the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1944 (shared with Erlanger).
Herbert Spencer Gasser

What is a Gasthaus?
small inn or hotel in a German-speaking country or region

What hotel in a German-speaking country is typically larger than a Gasthaus?
Gasthof

What is the inflammation of the lining of the stomach?
gastritis

What is gastritis?
inflammation of the lining of the stomach

What chief muscle of the calf of the leg, which flexes the knee and foot runs to the Achilles tendon from two heads attached to the femur? Don't be fooled, however: it isn't very close to the stomach.
gastrocnemius

What is the plural of ``gastrocnemius''?
gastrocnemii

What is a gastronome?
gourmet

To what class do snails belong?
Gastropoda

What large class of molluscs which includes snails, slugs, whelks, and all terrestrial kinds have a large muscular foot for movement and (in many kinds) a single asymmetrical spiral shell?
Gastropoda

What small phylum of minute aquatic wormlike animals that bear bristles and cilia are thought to be related to the nematode worms and rotifers?
Gastrotricha

What is an embryo at the stage following the blastula, when it is a hollow cup-shaped structure having three layers of cells?
gastrula

What name was given to any of seventeen poems attributed to Zoroaster --- the most ancient texts of the Avesta?
Gatha

What rapid-fire, crank-driven gun with clustered barrels was the first practical machine gun? The US army officially adopted it in 1866.
Gatling gun

What is a Gatso?
camera that automatically takes a photograph of road vehicles travelling over a certain speed

What does ``GATT'' abbreviate?
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

What is the other name for the Bonin Islands?
Ogasawara Islands 

Where is capsaicin found?
chilli peppers

Where are capsinoids found?
chilli peppers

What was Jacques Villeneuve's profession?
racing driver

What was Gilles Villeneuve's profession?
racing driver

Where was Gilles Villeneuve born?
Saint-Jean-sur-Richelieu, Quebec

Where did Gilles Villeneuve die?
Leuven, Belgium

What is the symbol for the voiceless alveolo-palatal fricative?
ɕ

What sound is represented by ɕ?
voiceless alveolo-palatal fricative

What state witnessed the birth of Ryan Whitney?
Massachusetts

Did Ryan Whitney play for the United States in the 2010 Olympics?
yes

Did Ryan Whitney play for the United States in the 2006 Olympics?
no

What is Joe Harris's alma mater?
Harvard University

Who advised Joe Harris?
Phillip Griffiths

Who was Ravi Vakil's advisor?
Joe Harris

Whose ``master theorem'' gives an expression for the Mellin transform of analytic functions?
Ramanujan

What settlement marks the northern end of the Dempster Highway?
Inuvik

What two cities does the north continuation of the Dempster Highway connect?
Inuvik, Tuktoyaktuk

What settlement marks the southern end of the Dempster Highway?
Dawson City

Define ``svelte.''
slender and elegant

Who played James Bond in Goldfinger?
Sean Connery

What is the first James Bond film?
Dr. No

Who played James Bond in Dr. No?
Sean Connery

Where was Sean Connery born?
Edinburgh

What tie knot shares its name with a vehicle drawn by horses?
four in hand

Let $\Lambda$ be the von Mangoldt function. When is $\Lambda(n)$ non-zero?
when $n$ is a prime power

What river does the Barragem do Alqueva impound?
Guadiana

What two districts house the Albufeira do Alqueva?
Beja, Évora

Of what is ``Gorka'' the Basque form?
George

What is the Basque equivalent of the name ``George''?
Gorka

What Portuguese district houses Montemor-o-Novo?
Évora

What historic Portuguese province contained Évora?
Alto Alentejo

What family comprises the smelts?
Osmeridae

What fish form the family Osmeridae?
smelts

What are the Yamanaka factors?
Oct3/4, Sox2, Klf4, c-Myc

What is the collective name of the genes Oct3/4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc?
Yamanaka factors

Where was George Bigliardi's steakhouse?
Toronto

What is a Noetherian integral domain that is integrally closed and of dimension less than or equal to one (that is, every non-zero prime ideal is maximal)?
Dedekind domain

Give the name of the following identity: $[x,[y,z]] + [y,[z,x]] + [z,[x,y]] = 0$.
Jacobi identity

What is the dimension of the exceptional Lie algebra $\mathfrak{g}_2$?
14

What is the dimension of the exceptional Lie algebra $\mathfrak{f}_4$?
52

What is the dimension of the exceptional Lie algebra $\mathfrak{e}_6$?
78

What is the dimension of the exceptional Lie algebra $\mathfrak{e}_7$?
133

What is the dimension of the exceptional Lie algebra $\mathfrak{e}_8$?
248

What is the name (c. Apr. 2023) of the largest federal riding in Quebec --- the one that houses Val d'Or?
Abitibi--Baie-James--Nunavik--Eeyou

Where was Jonathan Cheechoo born?
Moose Factory

What district in the Sakha Republic houses Kyyy?
Tattinsky

What okrug houses Iul'tin and Egvekinot?
Chukotka

What is the easternmost peninsula in Asia?
Chukchi Peninsula

What cape does the Chukchi Peninsula face?
Seward Peninsula

What is the principal settlement on Sandwich Bay?
Cartwright

Who wrote the song ``Alison'' for the album My aim is true?
Elvis Costello

Who advised Frans de Waal?
Jan van Hooff

What islands does Pevek face?
Routan Islands

Who wrote the paper ``How Often Should You Beat Your Kids?''
Don Zagier

What name is given to the decomposition of an algebra into sums of eigenspaces of idempotents?
Peirce decomposition

What was Lucy's species?
Australopithecus afarensis

What is Lucy's Amharic name?
Dinkinesh

Where was Wes McCauley born?
Georgetown, Ontario

What is Wes McCauley's profession?
NHL referee

What is Citrus reticulata?
mandarin orange

What is a $\Lambda$-graded vector space?
direct sum of vector spaces indexed by $\Lambda$

What does the Hall--Witt identity say?
$[x,y^{-1},z]^y \cdot [y,z^{-1},x]^z \cdot [z,x^{-1},y]^x = 1$

Recite the poem ``God Rot Ye Libertarians.''
God rot ye libertarians, you fill us with dismay / Your atheistic tendencies, your anarchistic ways / Your flaunted immorality leads innocents astray / But you'll get yours on Judgment Day, Judgment Day / Yes, you'll get yours on Judgment Day!

What decomposition of a semi-simple Lie group generalizes the QR decomposition?
Iwasawa decomposition

What is the English title of Aristophanes's Βάτραχοι?
The Frogs

Who introduced the concept of a $(B,N)$ pair?
Jacques Tits

What is the period in Bott periodicity?
$8$

What does Bott periodicity say is periodic?
the homotopy groups of the direct limit of the orthogonal groups

From what university did Murat Günaydin get his PhD?
Yale University

What Aristophanes play begins with Xanthias, speaking to Dionysus, asking, ``Εἴπω τι τῶν εἰωθότων ὦ δέσποτα, / ἐφ᾽ οἷς ἀεὶ γελῶσιν οἱ θεώμενοι;''?
The Frogs

What is the broadest muscle of the back?
latissimus dorsi

What was Solomon Joel Cohen better known as?
Sid James

Who starred with Tony Hancock in Hancock's half hour?
Sid James

What are the entries of the Cartan matrix of an algebra with simple roots $r_i$?
$a_{ji} = 2 (r_i,r_j)/(r_j,r_j)$

How many letters are in the Russian alphabet?
33

What territories contain Tumuc-Humac Mountains?
Brazil, French Guiana, Suriname

What is a klaxon?
electric horn or a similar loud warning device

Where is Cars set?
Radiator Springs

Where is Zion National Park?
Utah

What Brazilian state beheld the birth of Marta?
Alagoas

Who are the three (male and female) football players to have scored at five World Cups?
Marta, Christine Sinclair, and Cristiano Ronaldo

Where was Stephen Harper born?
Leaside, Ontario

Who was the first leader of the Conservative Party of Canada?
Stephen Harper

What country does N'Djamena, Chad border?
Cameroon

What Cameroonian city does N'Djamena border?
Kousséri

What two rivers converge in N'Djamena?
Chari, Logone

What African city sits at the confluence of the Logone and Chari rivers?
N'Djamena

What was N'Djamena named at its foundation?
Fort-Lamy

To what settlement does the RR-171 lead?
Uiramutã

What does ``Polska Górą!'' mean?
Poland on top

What is a Hopf algebra with a non-cocommutative coproduct?
quantum group

Let $C/\mathbf{F}_q$ be a smooth projective geometrically connected curve. What is a shtuka of rank $n$ over an $\mathbf{F}_q$-scheme $S$?
ordered pair $(\mathfrak{E}, \phi_{\mathfrak{E}})$ where $\mathfrak{E}$ is a vector bundle over $C\times_{\mathbf{F}_q} S$ and $\phi_{\mathfrak{E}}$ is a meromorphic isomorphism from $\operatorname{Frob}_S^* \mathfrak{E}$ to $\mathfrak{E}$ --- that is, $\phi_{\mathfrak{E}}$ is defined on an open subset of $C\times_{\mathbf{F}_q} S$ that is fibrewise-dense in $C$

Let $(L_n)_{n\in\mathbf{Z}}$ be a sequence. What relations do these numbers need to satisfy to generate a Virasoro algebra given a central charge $c$?
$[c,L_n]=0$ and $[L_m,L_n] = (m-n)L_{m+n} + c(m^3-m)\delta_{m+n,0}$

What is a profinite set?
compact, totally disconnected, Hausdorff topological space

What is the pro-\'etale site of a point?
the category of profinite sets with finite jointly surjective families of maps as covers

What is a condensed set?
sheaf of sets on the pro-\'etale site of a point

When is a condensed abelian group $V$ $p$-liquid (where $p\in (0,1]$)?
when, for every compact Hausdorff topological space $X$ and every morphism of condensed sets $f$ from $X$ to $V$, there exists a unique morphism of condensed abelian groups from $M_{<p}(X)$ to $V$ that extends $f$ along the inclusion of $X$ into $M_{<p}(X)$

What phrase is Rasheed Wallace famous for saying?
ball don't lie

Who wrote the song ``Any Way You Want It''?
Journey

Who wrote the song ``It's the End of the World as We Know It''?
R.E.M.

Assuming standard notation, what does the Weyl character formula for complex semi-simple Lie algebras say?
\begin{align*} \operatorname{ch}_\pi(H) = \frac{\sum_{w\in W} \varepsilon(w) e^{w+(\lambda+\rho)(H)}}{\prod_{\alpha\in\Delta^+} (e^{\alpha(H)/2} - e^{-\alpha(H)/2})} \end{align*}

Assuming standard notation, what does the Weyl denominator formula say?
\begin{align*} \sum_{w\in W} \varepsilon(w) e^{w(\rho)(H)} = \prod_{\alpha\in\Delta^+} (e^{\alpha(H)/2} - e^{-\alpha(H)/2}) \end{align*}

What is a pyknotic set?
sheaf of sets on the site of compact Hausdorff topological spaces whose underlying set has rank smaller than the smallest strongly inaccessible cardinal

Who wrote the song ``The Winner Takes It All''?
ABBA

What does ``sheket bevakasha'' mean?
quiet, please

Define ``pluripotent.''
(cell) capable of giving rise to several different cell types

What is the largest Ionian island?
Kefalonia

What is the Krull dimension of an Artinian ring?
0

What is the Japanese bullet train network called?
Shinkansen

State the Banach--Alaoglu theorem.
Let $\mathfrak{X}$ be a Banach space. Then, the closed unit ball $\mathfrak{X}_1^* := \{x^* \in \mathfrak{X}^* : \lVert x^*\rVert \le 1\}$ of $\mathfrak{X}^*$ is weak$*$-compact.

What principle states that a pointwise bounded family of continuous linear operators on Banach spaces is uniformly bounded (with respect to the operator norm)?
uniform boundedness principle

What does ``et seq.'' mean?
and what follows

What was Conan O'Brien's house band?
The Max Weinberg 7 

Who coined the term ``smooth number''?
Ron Rivest

What does ``atriðisorðaskrá'' mean?
index

What is zugzwang?
chess situation in which the obligation to make a move in one's turn is a serious, often decisive, disadvantage

Who wrote ``Time in a Bottle''?
Jim Croce

What is the principle of explosion?
the principle that any statement can be proved from a contradiction

What is ex falso quodlibet?
the principle that any statement can be proved from a contradiction

What remarkable thing does the proof of Banach's fixed point theorem say about sequences of the form $(\varrho^n(x))_n$ where $\varrho$ is a strict contraction on a complete metric space?
all such sequences converge to the same point and this point is the unique fixed point of $\varrho$

Who wrote the soundtrack to The godfather?
Nino Rota

Who does Michael marry in Sicily?
Apollonia

What is Fabrizio Romano's occupation?
journalist

Where was Mikhail Tal born?
Riga

Who is The Magician from Riga?
Mikhail Tal

Where was Ian Nepomniachtchi born?
Bryansk

Who played Magnus Carlsen in the 2021 World Chess Championship?
Ian Nepomniachtchi

What Hungarian chess player is considered the best female chess player of all time?
Polgár Judit

Who became World Chess Champion in 2013?
Magnus Carlsen

Who won the World Fischer Random Chess Championship in 2022?
Hikaru Nakamura

Where was Garry Kasparov born?
Baku

How many games were played before the 1984 Karpov--Kasparov world championship match was abandoned?
48

What was the score when the 1984 Karpov--Kasparov world championship match was abandoned?
5--3

Who terminated the 1984 Karpov--Kasparov world championship match?
Florencio Campomanes

When did Garry Kasparov become the world champion?
1985

Who did Garry Kasparov defeat to become the world champion?
Anatoly Karpov

How did Garry Kasparov play the final game of the 1985 world championship with the black pieces to win?
Sicilian defence

Where was Anatoly Karpov born?
Zlatoust

Who defeated Garry Kasparov in the 2000 world championship?
Vladimir Kramnik

Who succeeded Bobby Fischer as World Chess Champion?
Anatoly Karpov

Where was Bobby Fischer born?
Chicago

What year saw chess's match of the century?
1972

Who played in chess's match of the century?
Bobby Fischer, Boris Spassky

What was the score in the Spassky--Fischer match of the century (1972)?
8 1/2--12 1/2

Who wrote ``Sugar Mountain''?
Neil Young

Where is Deerhurst?
Huntsville

What are Sperrys?
shoes

For what is ``C. elegans'' short?
Caenorhabditis elegans

Who won the 2022 US Open Tennis Championships?
Carlos Alcaraz

Where was Khvicha Kvaratskhelia born?
Tbilisi

What pasta has a ``diameter between 2.08 and 2.30 millimetres (0.082 and 0.091 in) with little variation between different producers''?
vermicelli

Who are the mackerel snappers?
Catholics

Who sang ``The World We Knew''?
Frank Sinatra

What major water body does Sundarbans border?
Bay of Bengal

Who was the strongest of all the Danaans?
Diomedes

Where was Marty Turco born?
Sault Ste. Marie

What NHL team drafted Marty Turco?
Dallas Stars

What is Muslim prayer called?
salat

Who stars in Enter the dragon?
Bruce Lee

Who is Burnaby Joe?
Joe Sakic

What shish-kabob--like dish is popular in Russia?
shashlik

What is the Russian name for Easter bread?
kulich

Who composed 〈一剪梅〉?
费玉清

How many points did Connor McDavid have in the 2022--23 NHL season?
153

How many goals did Connor McDavid have in the 2022--23 NHL season?
64

How many assists did Connor McDavid have in the 2022--23 NHL season?
89

``The ability to play chess is the sign of a gentleman. The ability to play chess well is the sign of a wasted life.''
Paul Morphy

Let $\mathfrak{g}$ be an $N$-dimensional Lie algebra. Let $(\cdot,\cdot)$ be an $\operatorname{ad}$-invariant bilinear form on $\mathfrak{g}$ (say the Killing form). Let $\{x_1, . . . , x_N\}$ be a basis for $\mathfrak{g}$ and let $\{x_1^*, . . . , x_N^*\}$ be the dual basis with respect to $(\cdot,\cdot)$. What is the Casimir element for $(\cdot,\cdot)$?
\begin{align*} \sum_{n=1}^N x_nx_n^*\end{align*}

What is the chorale to which the O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden music is set in Bach's Christmas oratorio (BWV 248)?
Wie soll ich dich empfangen

What was the last completed work of Tchaikovsky?
Piano concerto no. 3

Who were the original members of the Budapest String Quartet?
Emil Hauser, Alfred Indig, István Ipolyi, Harry Son

Who comprised the Budapest String Quartet in 1951?
Josef Roisman, Jac Gorodetzky, Boris Kroyt, Mischa Schneider

What pope decreed ``God bless you'' as the correct response to a sneeze?
Gregory I

What chess player was disqualified from the 2022 Candidates?
Sergey Karjakin

Who won the 2023 World Chess Championship?
Ding Liren

What is a northern spy?
apple

What is Malus pumila?
apple

Define ``zeitgeber.''
rhythmically occurring natural phenomenon which acts as a cue in the regulation of the body's circadian rhythms

Define ``infradian.''
having a period of recurrence longer than a day

Define ``ultradian.''
having a period of recurrence shorter than a day but longer than an hour

For what does ``KMP'' stand in ``KMP algorithm''?
Knuth--Morris--Pratt

Who composed ``21st Century Schizoid Man''?
King Crimson

With whom is Nicomachean ethics associated?
Aristotle

What are the four types of man that Aristotle describes in Nicomachean ethics? 
the virtuous, the continent, the incontinent, the vice-filled

Where is the Blue Grotto?
Capri

What is Belone belone?
garfish

What region of south-western France is thought to produce boastful people?
Gascony

What is a gascon?
boastful person

What is gasconade?
extravagant boasting

What is the French name for Gascony?
Gascogne

What region and former province of south-western France in the northern foothills of the Pyrenees was held by England between 1154 and 1453?
Gascony

What is a chandelier with gas burners rather than light bulbs or candles?
gasolier

What is a gasolier?
chandelier with gas burners rather than light bulbs or candles

What shaped sheet or ring of rubber or other material seals the junction between two surfaces in an engine or other device?
gasket

What is the muscular part of the hind leg of a horse between the stifle and the hock?
gaskin

What peninsula contains the city of Percé?
Gaspé

What was a gasper?
cigarette

(1592--1655) What French astronomer and philosopher is best known for his atomic theory of matter, which was based on his interpretation of the works of Epicurus?
Pierre Gassendi

(1888--1963) What American physiologist, in collaboration with Joseph Erlanger, used an oscilloscope to show that the velocity of a nerve impulse is proportional to the diameter of the fibre?
Herbert Spencer Gasser

What were the last names of the two winners of the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1944? They won the prize for their work on nerve impulses.
Erlanger, Gasser

What is a Gastarbeiter?
person with temporary permission to work in another country

What epoch witnessed the Gastornis?
Eocene

What was the Gastornis?
very large flightless bird of the Eocene epoch

What is the surgical removal of the stomach?
gastrectomy

What is the chief muscle of the calf of the leg?
gastrocnemius

What chief muscle of the calf of the leg runs to the Achilles tendon from two heads attached to the femur?
gastrocnemius

Where is the gastrocnemius?
calf

What is a gastrolith?
small stone swallowed by a bird, reptile, or fish to aid digestion in the gizzard

What large class of molluscs includes snails, slugs, whelks, and all terrestrial kinds?
Gastropoda

What small phylum consists of minute aquatic wormlike animals that bear bristles and cilia? Its members are thought to be related to the nematode worms and rotifers. 
Gastrotricha

What is an embryo called at the stage following the blastula, when it is a hollow cup-shaped structure having three layers of cells?
gastrula

From what does a gastrula come?
blastula

What year witnessed the birth of William Henry Gates?
1955

What industrial town opposes Newcastle on the River Tyne?
Gateshead

What first practical machine gun was officially adopted by the US army in 1866?
Gatling gun

What does ``GATT'' abbreviate?
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

What hereditary disease sees abnormal metabolism and storage of fats and results in bone fragility, neurological disturbance, anaemia, and enlargement of the liver and spleen?
Gaucher's disease

What is a gaucho?
cowboy from the South American pampas

Who designed the Sagrada Família?
Antonio Gaudí

(1891–1915) What French sculptor --- a Vorticist --- created the faceted bust of Horace Brodzky (1912) and Bird Swallowing a Fish (1913)?
Henri Gaudier-Brzeska

Where did Paul Gauguin live after 1891?
Tahiti

What was a political official governing a district under Nazi rule called?
Gauleiter

What series of Cretaceous clays and marls forms strata in southern England? Perhaps its name is related to the Old Swedish for ``barren.''
Gault

What was Ghent's old name?
Gaunt

What wild ox having a large head, a dark brown or black coat with white stockings, and a hump is native to India and Malaysia and is the ancestor of the domestic gayal?
gaur

What is the capital of Gauteng?
Johannesburg

What was Gauteng's name before 1995?
Pretoria-Witwatersrand-Vereeniging

What is gavage?
the administration of food or drugs by force, especially to an animal, typically through a tube leading down the throat to the stomach

What was Sunil Gavaskar?
cricketer

In what system of inheritance is a deceased person's land divided equally among all male heirs?
gavelkind

What did ``Gavot'' mean in Provençal?
native of the Alps

What knight of the Round Table who quested after the Holy Grail is the hero of the medieval poem Sir [---] and The Green Knight?
Gawain

What does Gay-Lussac's law say?
the volumes of gases undergoing a reaction at constant pressure and temperature are in a simple ratio to each other and to that of the product

Whose law says that the volumes of gases undergoing a reaction at constant pressure and temperature are in a simple ratio to each other and to that of the product?
Gay-Lussac's

(1939--84) What American soul singer, composer, and musician who is best known for ``I Heard It Through the Grapevine'' (1968) later recorded the albums Let's Get It On (1973) and Midnight Love (1982)? He was shot dead by his father in a quarrel.
Marvin Gaye

What tropical herbaceous plant of the daisy family has showy flowers that are typically orange or yellow?
gazania

What former homeland established in South Africa for the Tsonga people is now part of the provinces of Limpopo and Mpumalanga?
Gazankulu

What is gazar?
stiff gauzy kind of silk fabric

To what country is Gaziantep closest?
Turkey

Define ``extemporize.''
compose or perform something such as music or a speech without preparation; improvise

Who is the earliest-born person to have been filmed?
Pope Leo XIII

What is a Salem number?
real algebraic integer $\lambda > 1$ whose conjugates have modulus at most $1$ and which has a conjugate of modulus precisely $1$

Who painted the Aino-taru --- the Aino myth triptych?
Akseli Gallen-Kallela

What country contains Shibam –-- the city of mudbrick skyscrapers?
Yemen

Who produced the Solitude trilogy for the CBC?
Glenn Gould

What year saw Glenn Gould's birth?
1932

Where was Glenn Gould born?
Toronto

``We suffer more in imagination than we do in reality.''
Seneca

Define ``prolix.''
using or containing too many words; tediously lengthy

When does the ``strange loop'' phenomenon occur?
whenever, by moving upwards (or downwards) through the levels of some hierarchical system, we unexpectedly find ourselves right back where we started

What is the first example of a strange loop that Hofstadter gives in Gödel, Escher, and Bach?
Canon per Tonos

Translate ``quaerendo invenietis.''
by seeking, you will discover

Who made the strange loop ``Waterfall''?
M. C. Escher

What is the statement defining the Epimenides paradox?
all Cretans are liars

What is Grelling's paradox?
``heterological'' is neither heterological nor not heterological

Where is Kishinev?
Moldova

What is the Danish name for Copenhagen?
København

Who constructed higher algebraic $K$-theory?
Daniel Quillen

What year saw Daniel Quillen win the Fields Medal?
1978

What year saw Pierre Deligne win the Fields Medal?
1978

Who was the leading exponent of spectral music?
Tristan Murail

When did the Algerian War end?
19 March 1962

When did Algeria get independence from France?
5 July 1962

When was Ásatrúarfélagið founded?
1972

Who do many consider to be the first permanent Norse settler of Iceland?
Ingólfr Arnarson

What is the name of Iceland's national anthem?
Lofsöngur

Define ``schlemiel.''
stupid, awkward, or unlucky person

Who said that ``it's very famous for difficult people to bomb''?
Conan O'Brien

What does ``PLUM'' abbreviate in the nomenclature of earthquake sensor technology?
propagation of local undamped motion

Where was the smiling Rafael Leão born?
Almada, Portugal

How many goals did Rafael Leão score in the 2022 World Cup?
2

Who managed the Croatian World Cup teams in 2018 and 2022?
Zlatko Dalić

Define ``quisling.''
traitor who serves as the puppet of the enemy occupying his country

What does the Oxford English Dictionary say that room temperature is in degrees Celsius?
20

What country administers Jan Mayen?
Norway

What is Jan Mayen's largest settlement?
Olonkinbyen

What state welcomed Brian Leetch into the world?
Texas

What was Paul Kariya's father's ethnicity?
Japanese

What is the dialling code for the São Paulo metropolitan area?
11

What is the dialling code for western São Paulo?
18

What is the dialling code for greater Rio de Janeiro and Teresópolis?
21

What is the dialling code for eastern and northern Rio de Janeiro?
22

What is the dialling code for western Rio de Janeiro?
24

What are the dialling codes for Espírito Santo?
27, 28

What is the dialling code for southern Espírito Santo?
28

What is the dialling code for central Minas Gerais?
31

What Brazilian state or states have the dialling code prefix ``3''?
Minas Gerais

What Brazilian state or states have the dialling code prefix ``4''?
Paraná, Santa Catarina

What Brazilian state or states have the dialling code prefix ``5''?
Rio Grande do Sul

What Brazilian state or states have the dialling code prefix ``6''?
Acre, Distrito Federal, Goiás, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Rondônia, Tocantins

What is the dialling code for Tocantins?
63

What are the dialling codes for Mato Grosso?
65, 66

What is the dialling code for Mato Grosso do Sul?
67

What is the dialling code for Acre?
68

What is the dialling code for Rondônia?
68

What Brazilian state or states have the dialling code prefix ``7''?
Bahia, Sergipe

What is the dialling code for Sergipe?
79

What Brazilian state or states have the dialling code prefix ``8''?
Alagoas, Ceará, Paraíba, Pernambuco, Piauí, Rio Grande do Norte

What is the dialling code for Alagoas?
82

What is the dialling code for Paraíba?
83

What is the dialling code for Rio Grande do Norte?
84

What are the dialling codes for Ceará?
85, 88

What are the dialling codes for Piauí?
86, 89

What is the dialling code for northern Piauí?
86

What Brazilian state or states have the dialling code prefix ``9''?
Amapá, Amazonas, Maranhão, Pará, Roraima

What is the dialling code for Roraima?
95

What is the dialling code for Amapá?
96

What is the dialling code for northern Maranhão?
98

Who wrote ``Linear Algebra Done Wrong''?
Sergei Treil

Who issued the earthquake and tsunami warnings on NHK on 11 March 2011 when the Great East Japan Earthquake occurred?
Kenzo Ito

What time was it locally when the Great East Japan Earthquake happened?
14:46

Who said, ``Hey, hey, you, you, get off of my cloud''?
The Rolling Stones

Who asked, ``Psycho killer / Qu'est-ce que c'est?''
Talking Heads

What is a coeval?
person of roughly the same age as oneself

What does escitalopram treat?
depression

What was a tunic?
loose garment, typically sleeveless and reaching to the wearer's knees, as worn in ancient Greece and

Where was Dean Martin born?
Steubenville, Ohio

Define ``staid.''
sedate, respectable, and unadventurous

What name is associated with the problem of determining if a constant-recursive sequence contains 0?
Skolem

About whom was the New York Times talking when it said that, ``[a]mong the handful of the world's most legendary pianists,'' he ``is perhaps the most reclusive, enigmatic and obsessive''? 
Arturo Benedetti Michelangeli

What is the Portuguese word for ``scapula''?
omoplata

What does ``omoplata'' mean in Portuguese?
scapula

With what sport is the omoplata associated?
Brazilian jiu-jitsu

What submission in Brazilian jiu-jitsu has the name ashi sankaku garami `leg triangle entanglement' in judo?
omoplata

From what city does the band Disturbed come?
Chicago

Where was Chung Myung-whun born?
Seoul

What Scottish town shares its name with a Canadian village south of Kitchener?
Ayr

What year saw the Hōei earthquake happen? It was the largest Japanese earthquake before the Great East Japan Earthquake.
1707

Who recorded the song ``Lay All Your Love on Me''?
ABBA

On what album did ``Lay All Your Love on Me'' appear?
Super Trouper

Who comprised ABBA?
Benny Andersson, Agnetha Fältskog, Anni-Frid Lyngstad, Björn Ulvaeus

What instrument does Nathalie Forget play?
ondes Martenot

What does 「吃一堑，长一智」 mean?
a fall into a pit, a gain in your wit

What does 「一根筷子容易折，一把筷子难折断」 mean?
one chopstick is fragile, but a group of chopsticks is robust

What does 「良好的开端，是成功的一半」 mean?
well begun is half done

What does 「三思而后行」 mean?
think three times before you do

What does 「量变质变规律」 mean?
quantitative changes lead to qualitative changes

What does 「巧妇难为无米之炊」 mean?
the cleverest housewife cannot cook without rice

Monomorphisms must be injective functions in Set. True or false?
false

``Once you solve a problem, . . . you tend to remember only the short path that got you from A to B. You forget all the dead ends. It's a bit of a shame. It gives the wrong impression that people who are good at mathematics only choose the right steps. But there is a lot of trial and error and really terribly embarrassing ideas. Sometimes there is a `eureka!' moment, but it’s more of a hitting-your-head moment: `Of course! Why was I so dense?''' Who said this?
Terence Tao

What name is given to a semi-hereditary integral domain?
Prüfer domain

When is a ring $R$ hereditary?
all submodules of projective $R$-modules are projective

When is a ring $R$ semi-hereditary?
all submodules of finitely generated projective $R$-modules are projective

What is a seiche?
temporary disturbance or oscillation in the water level of a lake or partially enclosed body of water, especially one caused by changes in atmospheric pressure

What was the score of the 2013 World Chess Championship between Viswanathan Anand and Magnus Carlsen?
3 1/2 -- 6 1/2

Where did Peter Sarnak get his PhD?
Stanford University

Who advised Peter Sarnak in his PhD?
Paul Cohen

Where is the Musiikkitalo?
Helsinki

What is Norway's largest fjord?
Sognefjord

What opening is comprised by the moves 1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 e6 3. Nf3 Bb4+?
Bogo--Indian defence

After whom is the Bogo--Indian defence named?
Yefim Bogolyubov

Define ``bootleg'' as a verb.
make, distribute, or sell (alcoholic drink or recording) illegally

What prefecture contains Nikkō?
Tochigi

What island contains Port Renfrew?
Vancouver Island

What name is given to a sequence of random variables $(X_n)_n$ that satisfies $\mathbf{E}(\lvert X_n \rvert) < \infty$ and $\mathbf{E}(X_{n+1} \mid X_1, . . . , X_n) = X_n$ for all $n$?
martingale 

What is the second convergent of the continued fraction of $\pi$?
\begin{align*}\frac{22}7\end{align*}

What is the third convergent of the continued fraction of $\pi$?
\begin{align*}\frac{333}{106}\end{align*}

What is the fourth convergent of the continued fraction of $\pi$?
\begin{align*}\frac{355}{113}\end{align*}

What number is called 「密率」 in Chinese?
\begin{align*}\frac{355}{113}\end{align*}

What two mathematicians were the first to prove the prime number theorem?
Jacques Hadamard, Charles Jean de la Vallée Poussin

What class of fields is comprised of finite extensions of $\mathbf{Q}$ and finite extensions of $\mathbf{F}_q(T)$?
global fields

Who challenged Magnus Carlsen in 2016 for the World Chess Championship?
Sergey Karjakin

What is Russia's southernmost island?
Furugelm Island

Where was Joseph Biden born?
Scranton, Pennsylvania

Where was Donald Trump born?
New York City, New York

Where was Ronald DeSantis born?
Jacksonville, Florida

Where was Barack Obama born?
Honolulu, Hawaii

What name is given to the display of a choreographed flag, sign, or banner in a stadium for a sporting event?
tifo

When is $\alpha$ $(\omega,C)$--badly approximable?
$\min_{p\in \mathbf{Z}} \lvert q\alpha - p \rvert \ge C q^{-\omega}$ for all $q\gg 1$

Define ``bulbil.''
small bulblike structure, in particular one in the axil of a leaf, which may fall to form a new plant

Is $\mathbf{Z}_{10}$ an integral domain?
no

Is $\mathbf{Z}_{5}$ an integral domain?
yes

What opus is Sibelius's Kullervo?
7

What does ``GBZ'' abbreviate?
Gibraltar

What does ``GC'' abbreviate in the UK?
George Cross

What country holds Gdynia?
Poland

What is the wild or sweet cherry, which is native to both Eurasia and North America?
gean

What is Prunus avium?
gean

What is a geanticline?
large-scale upwardly flexed structure in the earth's crust

(c. 721--c. 815) What Arab chemist was familiar with many chemicals and laboratory techniques, including distillation and sublimation? Many works are attributed to him, but his name was used by later writers.
Geber

What Australian shrub or small tree that bears creamy-yellow flowers and small green fruit belongs to the genus Persoonia?
geebung

What is Geechee?
English creole spoken by some black people in parts of South Carolina and Georgia

What Australian administrative division contains Geelong?
Victoria

What patch of very faint nebulous light sometimes seen in the night sky opposite the position of the sun is thought to be the image of the sun reflected from gas and dust outside the atmosphere?
gegenschein

What patch of very faint nebulous light sometimes seen in the night sky opposite the position of the sun is thought to be the image of the sun reflected from gas and dust outside the atmosphere? Its name comes from the German for ``opposite'' plus ``glow.''
gegenschein

What is gegenschein?
patch of very faint nebulous light sometimes seen in the night sky opposite the position of the sun

What is Gehenna?
Hell

What baseball player was known as the ``Iron Horse''?
Lou Gehrig

Who played a record 2,130 major-league games for the New York Yankees from 1925 to 1939?
Lou Gehrig

What does a Geiger counter measure?
radioactivity

(1835--1924) What Scottish geologist specialized in Pleistocene geology, especially the geomorphological effects of glaciations and the resulting deposits?
Sir Archibald Geikie

What sealed tube of glass or quartz with a central constriction is filled with vapour for the production of a luminous electrical discharge?
Geissler tube

What is a Geissler tube?
sealed tube of glass or quartz with a central constriction, filled with vapour for the production of a luminous electrical discharge

Define ``Geist.''
the spirit of an individual or group

What is the fertilization of a flower by pollen from another flower on the same (or a genetically identical) plant?
geitonogamy

What tin-mining city in southern China is located near the border with Vietnam?
Gejiu

What country's currency is the GEL?
Georgia

What brownish baboon with a long mane and naked red rump is native to Ethiopia? 
gelada

Define ``geld.''
castrate

What is the capital of Gelderland?
Arnhem

What province contains Arnhem?
Gelderland

Define ``gelid.''
icy; extremely cold

Define ``gelidity.''
the quality or condition of being extremely cold or icy

What high explosive made from a gel of nitroglycerine and nitrocellulose in a base of wood pulp and sodium or potassium nitrate is used particularly for rock-blasting?
gelignite

(1929--2019) What American theoretical physicist coined the word ``quark'' and proposed the concept of strangeness in quarks? He won the Nobel Prize for Physics (1969).
Murray Gell-Mann

What preparation of the rhizome of yellow jasmine used in homeopathy to treat flulike symptoms shares its name with the genus that includes the yellow jasmine?
gelsemium

What German state contains the industrial city of Gelsenkirchen?
North Rhine--Westphalia

What is the Gem State?
Idaho

What rabbinical commentary on the Mishnah forms the second part of the Talmud?
the Gemara

What Kabbalistic method of interpreting the Hebrew scriptures by computing the numerical value of words is based on the values of the constituent letters thereof?
gematria

(1905--84) What Lebanese political leader, as a Maronite Christian, founded the right-wing Phalange Party in 1936 and served as a Member of Parliament from 1960 to 1984? His youngest son, Bashir (1947--82), was assassinated while president-elect, and his eldest son, Amin (b. 1942), served as president from 1982 to 1988.
Pierre Gemayel

What mass noun of German origin refers to social relations between individuals, based on close personal and family ties?
Gemeinschaft

What adjective in phonetics describes something that consists of identical adjacent speech sounds or doubled?
geminate

What annual meteor shower with a radiant in the constellation Gemini reaches a peak about 13 December?
Geminids

What is a small cellular body or bud that can separate to form a new organism called?
gemma

What small cellular body or bud that can separate to form a new organism shares its name with a peculiar given name?
gemma

What is another term for chlamydospore?
gemma

Define ``gemmed.''
decorated with or as with gems

What adjective describes a plant or animal that reproduces by gemmation?
gemmiparous

What tough-coated dormant cluster of embryonic cells is produced by a freshwater sponge for development in more favourable conditions?
gemmule

What is a gemmule?
tough-coated dormant cluster of embryonic cells produced by a freshwater sponge for development in more favourable conditions

What large antelope (Oryx gazella) that has a grey coat, distinctive black-and-white head markings, and long straight horns is native to south-western and East Africa?
gemsbok

What is the systematic name for the gemsbok?
Oryx gazella

Define ``gemütlich.''
pleasant and cheerful

What is Gemütlichkeit?
geniality

Translate ``auspice Maria.''
under the protection of Mary

Who introduced the notion of perfectoid spaces?
Peter Scholze

When did Peter Scholze win the Fields Medal?
2018

Who advised Peter Scholze?
Michael Rapoport

Define ``saturnine.''
slow and gloomy

Who wrote ``The Decipherment of Linear B''?
John Chadwick

Who deciphered Linear B?
Michael Ventris

Translate ``solvitur ambulando.''
solved by walking

What is the highest point of Hopen Island in Svalbard?
Iversenfjellet

What is the southernmost point of Hopen Island in Svalbard?
Kapp Thor

For what is Daniel Ellsberg known?
releasing the Pentagon Papers

Who released the Pentagon Papers?
Daniel Ellsberg

Define ``reprobate'' as a noun.
unprincipled person

Define ``reticent.''
not revealing one's thoughts or feelings readily

Where was Noam Chomsky born?
Philadelphia

Where was Noam Chomsky educated?
University of Pennsylvania

What year saw Noam Chomsky publish his Syntactic structures?
1957  

Who was the first grandmaster that Mikhail Tal defeated?
Yuri Averbakh

Who wrote the song ``21 Questions''?
50 Cent

What Brazilian legend was part of the World XI squad at Soccer Aid 2023?
Roberto Carlos

Define ``phantasmagorical.''
full of different images, like something in a confused dream

Who asks, ``Guess who's back?''
Eminem

What ships was the HMS Hood to intercept before she sank?
Bismarck, Prinz Eugen

Define ``prevaricator.''
one who speaks or acts in an evasive way

Who won the Conn Smythe in 2023?
Jonathan Marchessault

Who won the Stanley Cup in 2023?
Vegas Golden Knights

What is syncretism?
the amalgamation or attempted amalgamation of different religions, cultures, or schools of thought

Who captained the Vegas Golden Knights to Stanley Cup glory in 2023?
Mark Stone

Who was the famous glassblower?
Bach

What is the meaning of the Bach title ``Quaerendo invenietis''?
seek and ye shall find

Translate ``aut Caesar aut nihil''?
either Caesar or nothing

What Chinese city is immediately north of Hong Kong?
Shenzhen

What is the deepest known point of Earth's seabed as of VII.2023?
Challenger Deep

What is the CCGS Terry Fox?
Canadian Coast Guard icebreaker

Where was Terry Fox born?
Winnipeg

When was Terry Fox born?
28 July 1958

What was Terry Fox's run called?
Marathon of Hope

Near where did Terry Fox commence his Marathon of Hope?
St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador

When did Terry Fox commence his Marathon of Hope?
12 April 1980

What form of cancer did Terry Fox have?
osteosarcoma

Which leg of Terry Fox's was amputated?
right

Near where was Terry Fox forced to end his Marathon of Hope?
Thunder Bay, Ontario

When was Terry Fox forced to end his Marathon of Hope?
1 September 1980

Where did Terry Fox study?
Simon Fraser University

What American state includes Puget Sound?
Washington

Who was Hermann Minkowski's advisor?
Ferdinand von Lindemann

What curved bar is part of the crash-protection system in open-wheel racing?
halo

Who directed The last waltz?
Martin Scorsese

When was The last waltz concert held?
25 November 1976

Whose concert did The last waltz document?
The Band's

What is Muzak?
background music

Where does William Nelson teach biology?
Queen's University

On what island is Tangerang located?
Java

How many syllables are in a haiku?
17

What is the haiku's syllabic pattern?
5-7-5

Where was Jacques Monod born?
Paris, France

Whose work on the lac operon won them a Nobel Prize in 1965?
François Jacob, Jacques Monod

Who played John Paul Getty III in All the money in the world?
Christopher Plummer

What does modus ponens say?
if x is true and x implies y then y is true

What does ``vel'' mean in Latin?
or

Who was Q. q. Switcheroo?
Albanian railroad engineer who worked in logic on the siding

What is ``Ganto's axe''?
koan

Who compared scalp skin and onion?
Leonardo da Vinci

Who has the initials NDE?
Noam David Elkies

What is a cohomological spectral sequence in an abelian category $\mathcal{A}$?
family $(E_{r}^{p,q}, d_{r}^{p,q}, \alpha_{r}^{p,q})$ where, for all $p$, $q$, and $r$, $E_{r}^{p,q}$ is an object in $\mathcal{A}$, $d_{r}^{p,q} : E_{r}^{p,q} \to E_{r}^{p + r, q - r - 1}$ is a morphism, $d_{r}^{p + r, q - r + 1} \circ d_{r}^{p,q} = 0$, $H^{p,q}(E_{r}) = \operatorname{Ker}(d_{r}^{p,q})/\operatorname{Im}(d_{r}^{p - r, q + r - 1})$, and $\alpha_{r}^{p,q} : H^{p,q}(E_{r}) \to E_{r + 1}^{p,q}$ is an isomorphism

What move does black play in the Berlin defence in response to the Ruy López?
Nf6

What moves characterize the open, dragon, Yugoslav attack in the Sicilian defence?
1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. d4 cxd4 4. Nxd4 Nf6 5. Nc3 g6 6. Be3 Bg7 7. f3

What moves characterize the King's Indian defence?
1. d4 Nf6 2. c4 g6

What moves characterize the advance Tal variation of the Caro--Kann defence?
1. e4 c6 2. d4 d5 3. e5 Bf5 4. h4

Who was the scourge of God?
Attila the Hun

What were the twelve tribes of Israel?
Asher, Benjamin, Dan, Gad, Issachar, Joseph, Judah, Levi, Naphtali, Reuben, Simeon, Zebulun 

What terrific violinist did Sergei Prokofiev play a match of chess against?
David Oistrakh

What excellent composer did David Oistrakh play a match of chess against?
Sergei Prokofiev

What opening did Sergei Prokofiev and David Oistrakh play in their only surviving game of chess?
Sicilian defence, dragon, classical variation 

What is the feast of St. Benedict of Nursia?
11 July

What does``RADAR'' abbreviate?
radio detection and ranging

What does ``WSR-88D'' abbreviate?
Weather Surveillance Radar, 1988, Doppler

What was Seurat's first name?
Georges-Pierre

Whose song is ``The Boys Are Back in Town''?
Thin Lizzy

``Don't only practice your art, but force your way into its secrets, for it and knowledge can raise men to the divine.''
Ludwig van Beethoven

``It is not enough to constitute a democracy that the whole crowd of citizens should have the right to do whatever they wish or propose. But where reverence to the gods, succour of parents, respect for elders, obedience to laws, are traditional and habitual, in such communities, if the will of the majority prevail, we may speak of the form of government as a democracy.''
Polybius

``Gender is a reality, and a more fundamental reality than sex. Sex is, in fact, merely the adaptation to organic life of a fundamental polarity which divides all created beings.''
C. S. Lewis

Where was Artur Yusupov born?
Moscow

Where was Vasyl Ivanchuk born?
Kopychyntsi

Where did the Picts live?
Britain

What is a Fréchet space?
locally convex metrizable complete topological vector space

What is an LF-space?
countable direct limit of Fréchet spaces

When is a seminorm $\nu$ not a norm on a vector space $\mathfrak{X}$ over $\mathbf{C}$?
there exists $x\ne 0$ such that $\nu(x) = 0$

Who defeated Novak Djokovic to win the 2023 Wimbledon Championships?
Carlos Alcaraz

Where was Novak Djokovic born?
Belgrade

Who was Novak Djokovic's apparel sponsor before UNIQLO?
Sergio Tacchini

What is the gena of an arthropod?
the lateral part of the head below the level of the eyes

What is the lateral part of the head of an arthropod below the level of the eyes called?
gena

What is the plural for ``gena''?
genae

What does ``gena'' mean in Latin?
cheek

What does ``gendarme'' mean if it is not referring to a person?
rock pinnacle on a mountain, occupying and blocking an arête

What is a gendarme?
paramilitary police officer in France and other French-speaking countries

What is the plural for ``genus''?
genera

What 1st Viscount (1861--1936), British soldier, and commander of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force against the Turks captured Jerusalem in 1917 and defeated the Turkish forces at Megiddo in 1918?
Edmund Allenby

What is the variation in the relative frequency of different genotypes in a small population, owing to the chance disappearance of particular genes as individuals die or do not reproduce?
genetic drift

What is genever?
Dutch gin

What is geneva?
Dutch gin

On what lake is Lausanne located? 
Lake Geneva

What is Lac Léman?
Lake Geneva

What is the French name for Lake Geneva?
Lac Léman

What is a genoa in sailing?
large jib or foresail whose foot extends aft of the mast, used especially on racing yachts

Where was Christopher Columbus born?
Genoa

What is the Italian name for Genoa?
Genova

Of what Italian region is Genoa the capital?
Liguria

What tops a genoa?
almonds

What name is given to a group of families in ancient Rome who shared a name and claimed a common origin?
gens

What is the anthropological term for a group of people who are related through their male ancestors?
gens

What is the plural for ``gens''?
gentes

What name is given to a combination of an engine and electrical generator used to produce electrical power, typically as a backup or portable source of power?
genset

What is the Flemish name for Ghent?
Gent

What broad-spectrum antibiotic used chiefly for severe systemic infections is derived from bacteria of the genus Micromonospora?
gentamicin

Define ``genteel.''
characterized by exaggerated or affected politeness, refinement, or respectability

This plant of temperate and mountainous regions typically has violet or vivid blue trumpet-shaped flowers. Many kinds are cultivated as ornamentals, especially as arctic alpines, and some are of medicinal use. Give its name.
gentian

(c. 1370--1427) What Italian painter's major surviving work is the altarpiece The adoration of the Magi (1423)?
Gentile da Fabriano

Define ``gentility.''
social superiority as demonstrated by polite and respectable manners, behaviour, or appearances

What is a Gentle Annie?
steep slope or hill

Technically, to what force of wind does ``gentle breeze'' refer on the Beaufort scale?
3 

What speed range does light wind have to fit into in knots to be considered a ``gentle breeze''?
7--10 knots

What speed range does light wind have to fit into in km/h to be considered a ``gentle breeze''?
13--19 km/h

What is a gentleman's gentleman?
valet

What is Gentleman's Relish?
highly seasoned anchovy paste

What tall penguin with a white triangular patch above the eye, breeding on subantarctic islands, has the systematic name Pygoscelis papua and belongs to the family Spheniscidae?
gentoo

What is the genu in human anatomy?
the knee

What is the plural for ``genu''?
genua

What name is given to a part of certain structures resembling a knee, in particular a bend in the corpus callosum of mammals?
genu

Who is the wife of Elvis Costello?
Diana Krall

``Whoever fights monsters should see to it that in the process he does not become a monster. And when you look long into an abyss, the abyss also looks into you.''
Friedrich Nietzsche

When was Ian Nepomniatchi born?
14 July 1990

Translate ``előadóművészet.''
performing arts

Whose death was announced on the day that Sergei Prokofiev died?
Joseph Stalin

What composer died on the day that the death of Joseph Stalin was announced?
Sergei Prokofiev

When did Sergei Prokofiev die?
5 March 1953

When did Joseph Stalin die?
5 March 1953

What was Gennady Rozhdestvensky's occupation?
conductor

When was Gennady Rozhdestvensky born?
4 May 1931

Where was Gennady Rozhdestvensky born?
Moscow

What were the first thirty words of Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg address?
Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.

What name is given to the potential unique zero of a Dirichlet $L$-function in a zero-free region?
Siegel zero

Let $k \ge 1$. What is an admissible $k$-tuple?
tuple of $k$ increasing integers such that, for all prime numbers $p$, there exists $0 \le n \le p - 1$ such that none of the integers are $n$ mod $p$

Who wrote the paper ``Bounded Gaps Between Primes''?
Yitang Zhang

Who was Vietnam's first female mathematician?
Hoàng Xuân Sính

Of whom was Hoàng Xuân Sính a student?
Alexander Grothendieck

``God became man that man might become God.''
St. Athanasius

``In mathematics, the art of asking questions is more valuable than that of solving problems.''
Georg Cantor

Where was Georg Cantor born?
St. Petersburg

Where was Stefan Banach born?
Kraków

``In the early sixties, $X$ visited Harvard while Zariski was still a faculty member. Once, while Zariski was lecturing in a seminar, $X$ kept asking him why he didn't prove the result for all schemes, not just varieties, but Zariski simply responded that it didn't work. Eventually, $X$ could stand it no longer and went to the blackboard and began writing down a proof for schemes. While he did so, Zariski wrote down a counter-example. When $X$ realized he was wrong, Zariski said (in his heavily accented Russo-Italian English) `In my time, I have had to learn many languages.' At this, $X$ turned bright red from embarrassment.'' Who was $X$?
Alexander Grothendieck

Who directed The Breakfast Club?
John Hughes

Who played Andrew Clark in The Breakfast Club?
Emilio Estevez

``Wake up, Mr. West, Mr. West / Mr. Fresh, Mister, by himself he's so impressed / I mean, damn, did you even see the test? / You got D's, muthaf***a, D's, Rosie Perez / And yer ass barely passed any and every class / Looking at every ass, cheated on every test / I guess this is my dissertation / Homie, this shit is basic, welcome to graduation. [---].''
Good morning

What is the maximum probability that two elements in a non-abelian compact topological group commute?
\begin{align*}\frac 58\end{align*}

Give the number. What Brahms symphony's finale is a passacaglia with thirty variations?
4

Who was Ziggy's father?
Bob

Who was the first to round the Cape of Good Hope?
Bartolomeu Dias

Who was Cosimo de' Medici's wife?
Contessina de' Bardi

What year saw Filippo Brunelleschi die?
1446

Where is the Forbidden City?
Beijing

What was the Golden Horde's capital? It shares its name with Abram's wife.
Sarai

Under what pope did Guillaume Du Fay begin his post as the musician of the papal choir?
Martin V

What number is associated with the Gutenberg Bible?
42

What was the Hanseatic League's capital?
Lübeck

Of what Dutch painter was John III a patron in the 1420s?
Jan van Eyck

Where did St. Joan of Arc die?
Rouen

What pope canonized St. Joan of Arc?
Benedict XV

Who wrote Sefer ha-Ikkarim?
Joseph Albo

What river flows close to Machu Picchu?
Urubamba River

Who was Henry Tudor's mother?
Margaret Beaufort

Who was the king of Hungary and Croatia from 1458 to 1490?
Matthias Corvinus

Who conquered Constantinople in 1453?
Mehmed II

Who preceded Pope Sixtus IV?
Pope Paul II

Who succeeded Pope Sixtus IV?
Innocent VIII

Who was Sandro Botticelli apprentice?
Filippo Lippi

What is 「絲綢之路」 ?
Silk Road

What year saw the establishment of the Spanish Inquisition?
1478

What killed Vasco da Gama?
malaria

What country considers Vlad the Impaler a national hero?
Romania

What did Zheng He want to do by diverting from his fleet on his final voyage?
hajj

Translate ``Gewaltig.''
enormous

Translate ``über alles.''
above all

Who is the cruelest animal according to Nietzsche?
man

What activity involves an item, or a container holding many items, being hidden at a particular location for GPS users to find using coordinates posted on the internet?
geocaching

What giant mud-burrowing bivalve mollusk, whose shell valves are not large enough to enclose its body and very long siphon, occurs on the west coast of North America, where it is collected for food? 
geoduck

What is Panopea generosa?
geoduck

To what family does the geoduck belong?
Hyatellidae

Define ``geode.''
small cavity in rock lined with crystals or other mineral matter

What sport did Geoffrey Boycott play?
cricket

What was Chaucer's first name?
Geoffrey

Who composed Troilus and Criseyde in 1385?
Geoffrey Chaucer

Who designed the Mosquito aircraft of World War II?
Sir Geoffrey de Havilland

What Welshman composed Historia Regum Britanniae circa 1139?
Geoddrey of Monmouth

What hypothetical solid figure's surface corresponds to the mean sea level and its imagined extension under (or over) land areas?
geoid

What is the art of placing or arranging buildings or other sites auspiciously?
geomancy

What was Ohm's first name?
Georg

(1912--97) What Hungarian-born British conductor revivified Covent Garden as musical director (1961--71) and was the conductor of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra (1969--91) and the London Philharmonic Orchestra (1979--83)?
Sir Georg Solti

What is the capital of the Cayman Islands?
George Town

What is Penang also called?
George Town

Who is the patron saint of England?
St. George

Where did Georges-Auguste Escoffier work from 1890 to 1899?
Savoy Hotel

Define ``georgic'' as an adjective.
rustic; pastoral

Who wrote the Georgics?
Virgil

What is a geosyncline?
large-scale depression in the earth's crust containing very thick deposit

What fragrant oil --- present in lemongrass oil and used in perfumery --- has the chemical formula C10H16O?
geranial

(154--1612) What English herbalist was the curator of the physic garden of the College of Surgeons and published his Herball, containing over 1,800 woodcuts, in 1597?
John Gerard

(b. 1948) What French actor acted in Danton (1982), Jean de Florette(1986), and Cyrano de Bergerac (1990)?
Gérard Depardieu

What tropical Old World plant of the daisy family that has large brightly coloured flowers and that is cultivated under glass in cooler regions is named after a German naturalist?
gerbera

What slender East African antelope with a long neck often browses on tall bushes by standing on its hind legs?
gerenuk

What is Litocranius walleri?
gerenuk

Who was the chancellor of Germany from 1998 to 2005?
Gerhard Schröder

(1791--1824) What French painter was criticized for his rejection of classicism in favour of a more realistic style? His most famous work, The raft of the Medusa (1819), depicts the survivors of a famous shipwreck of 1816.
Théodore Géricault

What shipping forecast area covers the eastern North Sea off the northern Netherlands, Germany, and southern Denmark?
German Bight

What is another name for a German shepherd?
Alsatian

What expression of exhilaration would have alerted a certain Apache chief?
Geronimo

What was the name of George Gershwin's lyricist brother?
Ira Gershwin

What form of a Latin verb ends verbs with ``--ndus'' (declinable) and functions as an adjective meaning ``that should or must be done''?
gerundive

What family of tropical plants includes African violets and gloxinias?
gesneriad

What hard compound of plaster of Paris or whiting in glue is used in sculpture or as a base for gilding or painting on wood?
gesso

What does a German say to one who has just sneezed?
Gesundheit

Where did Jesus go with his disciples after the Last Supper?
Garden of Gethsemane

(1927--91) What American leader of the ``cool'' school of jazz recorded pieces including ``Early Autumn'' (1948) and ``The Girl from Ipanema'' (1963)?
Stan Getz

What plant genus comprises the avens?
Geum

Where is Gewürztraminer principally grown?
Alsace, Austria, the Rhine valley

What is a geyser?
hot spring in which water intermittently boils, sending a tall column of water and steam into the air

What name is given to a burst of light caused by damaged electrical equipment, sometimes caused by tornados?
power flash

How do you pronounce ``Laoghaire''?
ˈlɪɹə

Define ``philistine'' as an adjective.
hostile or indifferent to culture and the arts

Translate ``de gustibus non est disputandum.''
in matters of taste, there cannot be dispute

What is the Slavic shortening of ``Alexander''?
Sasha

Who composed the opera The turn of the screw?
Benjamin Britten

Who composed the novella The turn of the screw?
Henry James

Who sings: ``nightingale, sing us a song''?
Norah Jones

With whom did Bobby McFerrin collaborate on the album Hush?
Yo-Yo Ma

With whom did Yo-Yo Ma collaborate on the album Hush?
Bobby McFerrin

What album was the result of collaboration between Bobby McFerrin and Yo-Yo Ma?
Hush

Where did Barak Schmool study saxophone and composition?
Royal Academy of Music

Who says that it ain't where you from, but that it's where you at?
Rakim

What are the four coastal municipalities of Piauí?
Cajueiro da Praia, Ilha Grande, Luís Correia, Parnaíba

Who painted Jean Sibelius's favourite painting?
Oscar Parviainen

What piece did Magnus Carlsen sacrifice to win the World Chess Championship against Sergey Karjakin?
queen

Who were the six patriarchs of Zen Buddhism?
Bodhidharma, Dazu Huike, Jianzhi Sengcan, Dayi Daoxin, Daman Hongren, Dajian Huineng

What is tumbolia?
where nothing is everything

How many koans comprise the Mumonkan?
48

What is Neochen jubata?
Orinoco goose

Who was Romania's last communist leader?
Nicolae Ceaușescu

When did Nicolae Ceaușescu die?
25 December 1989

What is the category of non-empty finite ordinals and order-preserving maps?
simplex category

What year saw David Howell earn the title of Grandmaster?
2007

Who wrote Perelandra?
C. S. Lewis

When was George Stroumboulopoulos born? No need to give the time of day.
16 August 1972

Where did Grandmaster Fabiano Caruana grow up?
Brooklyn

Who won the 2023 Tata Steel Chess Tournament?
Anish Giri

Where was Grandmaster Teimour Radjabov born?
Baku, Azerbaijan

Where was Grandmaster Dommaraju Gukesh born?
Chennai

Where was Grandmaster Shakhriyar Mamedyarov born?
Sumgait, Azerbaijan

Where was Grandmaster Maxime Vachier-Lagrave born?
Nogent-sur-Marne, France

What does Maxime Vachier-Lagrave do?
play chess

Where was Grandmaster Leinier Domínguez born?
Havana, Cuba

In what year was Grandmaster Alexander Grischuk born?
1983

Where was Grandmaster Yu Yangyi born?
Huangshi, Hubei

Where was Grandmaster Jan-Krzysztof Duda born?
Kraków

In what year was Grandmaster Lê Quang Liêm born?
1991

In what country was Grandmaster Nodirbek Abdusattorov born?
Uzbekistan

In what year was Grandmaster Nodirbek Abdusattorov born?
2004

Where was Rameshbabu Praggnanandhaa born?
Chennai

Where was Grandmaster Peter Svidler born?
Leningrad / St. Petersburg

Where was Grandmaster Boris Gelfand born?
Minsk

Where was Grandmaster Vasyl Ivanchuk born?
Kopychyntsi, USSR

What is a ghaghra?
long full skirt, often decorated with embroidery, mirrors, or bells

What was Ghana's name until 1957?
Gold Coast

What are the two distinctive dialects of the Albanian language?
Gheg, Tosk

What country's north is home to the Gheg people?
Albania

What small green fruit of a plant related to the cucumber is born by the trailing plant Cucumis anguria?
gherkin

What does ``GHG'' abbreviate?
greenhouse gas

What political faction in Italian medieval politics traditionally supported the Holy Roman emperor against the Pope and his supporters, the Guelphs?
Ghibellines

What two political factions were at odds in medieval Italy?
Ghibellines, Guelphs

(1378--1455) What Italian sculptor and goldsmith's career was dominated by his work on two successive pairs of bronze doors for the baptistery in Florence?
Lorenzo Ghiberti

Define ``ghibli.''
hot, dry southerly wind of North Africa

(c. 1448--94) What Italian painter born ``Domenico di Tommaso Bigordi'' is noted for his religious frescoes, particularly Christ calling Peter and Andrew (1482--84) in the Sistine Chapel?
Ghirlandaio

What name is given to the hybrid of Capsicum frutescens and C. chinense?
ghost pepper

What two peppers are hybridized to create the ghost pepper?
Capsicum frutescens, Capsicum chinense

What is ghrelin?
peptide hormone, produced predominantly in the stomach, that stimulates the secretion of growth hormone from the pituitary gland and increases appetite

What peptide hormone, produced predominantly in the stomach, stimulates the secretion of growth hormone from the pituitary gland and increases appetite?
ghrelin

Who destroyed Ghulghuleh, Afghanistan?
Genghis Khan

What is the ritual washing of the whole body, as prescribed by Islamic law to be performed in preparation for prayer and worship, and after sexual activity, childbirth, menstruation, et cetera?
ghusl

What is gianduja?
chocolate paste flavoured with ground hazelnuts

What was Versace's first name?
Gianni

What large edible freshwater fish that is native to Asia is widely farmed there and has been introduced elsewhere? It belongs to the family Osphronemidae and genus Osphronemus.
giant gourami

What mollusks belong to the family Tridacnidae?
giant clams

What is the common name given to two species in the genus Macronectes and family Procellariidae?
giant petrel

What European fungus (Langermannia gigantea) produces a spherical white fruiting body with a diameter of up to 80 cm and is edible when young?
giant puffball

What is Langermannia gigantea?
giant puffball

What is the systematic name for the giant puffball?
Langermannia gigantea

What geological formation of basalt columns, dating from the Tertiary period, is found on the north coast of Northern Ireland? It was once believed to be the end of a road made by a legendary giant to Staffa in the Inner Hebrides, where there is a similar formation.
Giant's Causeway

What spicy Italian-style relish consists of mixed pickled vegetables?
giardiniera

Who claps and asks smart people ``what's going on''?
Andrew Dotson

Whose story does The blind side tell?
Michael Oher

What do gibberellins stimulate?
stem elongation, germination, and flowering

What plant hormones stimulate stem elongation, germination, and flowering?
gibberellins

What does the Latin ``gibbus'' mean in English?
hump

What channel separates the southern tip of the Iberian peninsula and North Africa?
Strait of Gibraltar

(1883--1931) What Lebanese-born American writer and artist is best known for The Prophet (1923)? His writings in both Arabic and English are deeply romantic, displaying his religious and mystical nature.
Khalil Gibran

What is a Gibson?
dry martini cocktail garnished with a pickled onion

What desert region in Western Australia is located to the southeast of the Great Sandy Desert?
Gibson Desert

What team did Bob Gibson pitch for from 1959 to 1975?
St. Louis Cardinals

(b. 1956) What Australian actor and director is noted for the Lethal Weapon trilogy (1987, 1989, and 1992), Braveheart (1995), and The Passion of the Christ (2004)?
Mel Gibson

What is a gibus?
hat

What technology for fine art or photograph reproduction uses a high-quality inkjet printer to make individual copies?
giclée

(1904--2000) What English actor and director was a notable Shakespearean actor particularly remembered for his interpretation of the role of Hamlet and also appeared in contemporary plays and movies including the film Arthur (1980)?
Sir John Gielgud

Who was the governor of Pennsylvania from 1931 to 1935?
Gifford Pinchot

What is the struggle between the gods and the giants?
gigantomachy

What is gigantomachy?
the struggle between the gods and the giants

To what family did the Gigantopithecus belong?
Pongidae

What is a gigolo?
young man paid or financially supported by an older woman to be her escort or lover

What is a gigot?
leg of mutton or lamb

What is a leg of mutton or lamb called?
gigot

What archipelago lies approximately 500 nautical miles from mainland Brazil and is part of the state district of Fernando de Noronha? 
Saint Peter and Saint Paul Archipelago

What physicist is noted for the theory of the polaron?
Sigurd Zienau

What name is given to a bound pair of electrons in a superconductor?
Cooper pair

What does ``BCS'' abbreviate as in ``BCS pair''?
Bardeen--Cooper--Schrieffer

Who wrote ``The Architecture of Complexity''?
Herbert A. Simon

What country contains Val Fex?
Switzerland

What Brazilian state contains the municipality of Carauari?
Amazonas

What moves characterize the Canal attack (or the Moscow variation) in the Sicilian defence?
1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 d6 3. Bb5+ Bd7

What is the binomial name of the Finsch's wheatear?
Oenanthe finschii

What is the more common name for Oenanthe finschii? 
Finsch's wheatear

What was Elo's given name?
Arpad

Where is Árpád híd?
Budapest

What wood cmes from Millettia laurentii?
wengé

Where was Vladimir Tarasenko born?
Yaroslavl, Russia

Define ``amanuensis.''
literary or artistic assistant, in particular, one who takes dictation or copies manuscripts

What Canadian mathematician is known for Integral House?
James Stewart

What is ``a reduction in the lift coefficient generated by a foil as angle of attack increase'' in fluid dynamics?
stall

Which reaches further north: Ireland or Northern Ireland?
Ireland

What bridge connects Rio de Janeiro and Niterói over Guanabara Bay?
Ponte Presidente Costa e Silva

What bridge connects Manaus and Iranduba?
Ponte Jornalista Phelippe Daou

What bridge was the longest over water at the time of its completion in 1956?
Lake Pontchartrain Causeway

What were the questions asked at the bridge of death in Monty Python and the Holy Grail?
What is your favourite colour? What is the capital of Assyria? What is your favourite colour? What is the airspeed velocity of an unladen swallow?

What MLB team drafted Tom Brady?
Montreal Expos

Who was the eightieth and the eighty-third speaker of the United States House of Representatives? His two terms were from 1947 to 1949 and from 1953 to 1955. He was a Republican from Massachusetts.
Joseph W. Martin Jr.

What slave character from the plays of Aristophanes is Dicaeopolis's slave in The Acharnians?
Xanthias

What is the first of Aristophanes's surviving plays?
The Acharnians 

What two mathematicians proved that there exist arbitrarily large arithmetic progressions in the prime numbers?
Ben Green, Terence Tao

For what does the ``D. H. J.'' stand in ``D. H. J. Polymath''?
Density Hales Jewett

Who created TeX?
Donald Knuth

Where did Donald Knuth receive his PhD?
California Institute of Technology

Who was Donald Knuth's doctoral advisor?
Marshall Hall Jr.

Who were the two authors of ``Ring Theoretic Properties of Certain Hecke Algebras,'' proving at last Fermat's last theorem?
Richard Taylor, Andrew Wiles

Who was Richard Taylor's doctoral advisor at Princeton?
Andrew Wiles

Who advised Kevin Buzzard?
Richard Taylor

Who advised Richard Borcherds?
John H. Conway

Who proved that all finite groups of odd order are solvable?
Walter Feit, John G. Thompson

What three mathematicians proved that $\liminf_{n\to\infty} (p_{n+1} - p_n) / \log p_n = 0$ in a paper entitled ``Primes in Tuples I''?
Daniel Alan Goldston, Pintz János, Cem Yalçın Yıldırım

Where did Szemerédi Endre receive his PhD?
Lomonosov Moscow State University

Where did William Thurston receive his PhD?
University of California, Berkeley

Who penned A modest proposal? 
Jonathan Swift

Who is the Raumdeuter?
Thomas Müller

``To a soul that beholds the Creator, all creation is narrow in compass. For when a man views the Creator's light, no matter how little of it, all creation becomes small in his eyes.''
St. Gregory the Great

What Star Trek clause serves as a modern example of the split infinitive?
to boldly go where no man has gone before

Who was the Greek goddess of persuasion?
Peitho

What did Peitho personify?
persuasion 

Define ``echt.''
authentic and typical

What monastic tradition in the Eastern Church was characterized by seeking stillness via continuous prayer? Its name comes from the Ancient Greek ἡσυχάζει, which means ``he rests.''
Hesychasm

What Franco-Ontarian song was composed by Jean-Pierre Perreault and Brian St-Pierre?
Mon bon drapeau

``When you are dead, you don't know you are dead. It's pain only for others. It's the same thing when you are [this].''
stupid

What is Canada's longest bridge?
Confederation Bridge

What is the area of grammar dealing with endings?
accidence

What is the usual case of a direct object?
accusative

What verb form is used most commonly when the subject of the sentence performs the action or has his state described?
active

What is the noun, pronoun, or clause to which a relative pronoun refers back?
antecedent

What tense of a verb refers to something that happened in the past? An example is ``ἐποίησα'' in ``τοῦτο ἐποίησα.''
aorist

What is the main clause of a conditional sentence?
apodosis

What is the placing of a word, phrase, or clause in parallel with another word, phrase, or clause to give further information about the latter?
apposition

What is the term referring to the distinction between two ways in which a verb can convey time (the time and the type of time)?
aspect

What is something added at the beginning of verbs to denote a past tense?
augment

What is a clause usually beginning in English with the word ``although'' or ``though''?
concessive clause

What is a clause usually beginning in English with the words ``if,'' ``if not,'' or ``unless''?
conditional clause

What is a word used to join clauses, phrases, or words together?
conjunction

What case of an indirect object may mean ``to,'' ``for,'' ``with,'' and ``by''?
dative

What are the Greek definite articles?
ὁ, ἡ, τό

What adjective describes words or expressions that ``point'' to some feature of a situation?
deictic

What is a deponent verb?
passive in form but active in function

What are the two dots placed over the second of two adjacent vowels that are to be pronounced separately, as in ``βοΐ ''?
diaeresis

What is a word formed from another to express diminished size, as with ``hillock''?
diminutive

What is the union of two vowels pronounced as one syllable (one vowel followed by a glide into a second vowel)?
diphthong

What is a short word that cannot stand alone but has to follow another word onto which it throws back its accent?
enclitic

What is the tens of a verb that refers to something in the future at a stage after it has happened, as in ``I shall have ceased''?
future perfect

What is the case that shows possession and means ``of'' dominantly?
genitive

What verbal adjective expresses the idea of obligation?
gerundive

What are the parts of the verb that express a command?
imperative

What tense expresses continuous, repeated, or incomplete action in the past?
imperfect

What is a verb introduced in English by the word ``it''?
impersonal

Of what is the adding of the English word ``ever'' to the end of another word an example?
indefinite construction

Define ``jussive.''
giving an order

What is a verb that does not take a direct object?
intransitive

What is the case that tells us where something is happening?
locative

What is a line above a vowel indicating that it is long?
macron

What is the case of the subject of a sentence or usually of the complement of a verb?
nominative

What Greek mood of the verb does not express statements but such concepts as ``would,'' ``might,'' and ``if only!''? It is also used in the indefinite construction and in certain subordinate clauses. It is more remote than the subjunctive in either likelihood or time.
optative

What verb means ``to give a full grammatical description of a word'' --- that is, ``to give the person, number, tense, mood, voice, and meaning''?
parse

What is an adjective formed from a verb?
participle

What is the tense of a verb that refers to a completed action, the effects of which still continue into the present?
perfect

What is the tense that means ``had,'' referring to a past state resulting from a completed action?
pluperfect

What is a word that stands instead of a noun?
pronoun

What is the ``if . . .'' or ``unless . . .'' clause of a conditional sentence?
protasis

What is the process by which verbs beginning with a single consonant (not ῥ) form a prefix in the perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect by adding that letter followed by an ε at the beginning?
reduplication

What is a pronoun that introduces a subordinate clause, identifying the person or thing mentioned in the main clause?
relative pronoun

What is the principle according to which the use of a certain tense in the main clause determines whether the subjunctive or the optative should be used in a subordinate clause?
sequence of tenses and moods

What is the part of a noun, adjective, or verb to which endings are added?
stem

What is, in a clause or sentence, the noun or pronoun that causes the action of the verb or has his state described?
subject

What verb form is used, among many other functions, to express doubt, unlikelihood, or possibility? It is less remote than the optative in either likelihood or time. Words such as ``may,'' ``might,'' and ``should'' can indicate it in English.
subjunctive

What is a clause that depends on another clause (usually the main clause) of the sentence in which it stands?
subordinate clause

What is the form of an adjective or adverb that makes it mean ``most'' or ``very''?
superlative

What is a verb used with a direct object either expressed or understood?
transitive

What is the case by which one addresses or calls to someone?
vocative

Who were the three great Attic poets of tragedy in the fifth century BC?
Aeschylus, Euripides, Sophocles

What case indicates separation, or moving away from something?
ablative case

What system of vowel alternation in Proto-Indo-European involves vowels that are used in various parts of a word changing depending on meaning? In the Germanic languages, it forms the basis of the strong verbs.
ablaut

What case is used to indicate the patient or experiencer of a verb's action?
absolutive case

What name is given to a verb of motion whose motion is multidirectional (as opposed to unidirectional) or indirect, or whose action is repeated or iterative, in the Slavic languages?
abstract verb

What does ``AD'' abbreviate?
Anno Domini

Of what is alus mider an example in the Balinese language?
speech register

Of what is andap an example in the Balinese language?
speech register

What is the third-to-last syllable of a word?
antepenultima

What is the removal of a letter or sound from the beginning of a word?
apheresis

What is the removal of an initial unstressed sound from a word? It is the process by which ``escarp'' became ``scarp.''
aphesis

What is the omission of the final sound or syllable of a word without changing its morphological structure or meaning?
apocope

What is a consonant sound produced by restricting the air flow through the mouth only slightly, resulting in a smooth sound?
approximant

What property of a verb form indicates the nature of an action as perfective (complete) or imperfective (incomplete or continuing)?
aspect

What is the aspect of a verb that denotes an action without a definite endpoint or a goal that is tended towards, or rather an action with cumulative reference (such that the expression for that action may describe two or more actions of that kind that, when combined, still constitute a form of that action)?
atelic

What is an adjective that stands in a syntactic position where it directly modifies a noun, as opposed to a predicate adjective?
attributive

What name is given to a term formed by removing an apparent or real prefix or suffix from an older term? For example, the noun ``pea'' arose because the final /z/ sound in ``pease'' sounded like a plural suffix.
back-formation

Define ``barytone.''
with the stress elsewhere than upon the final syllable

What does ``BC'' abbreviate?
Before Christ

What name is given to a borrowing by word-for-word translation? For example, the English expression ``it goes without saying'' is a literal, word-for-word translation of the French ``ça va sans dire,'' and ``flea market'' is a word-for-word translation of the French ``marché aux puces.''
calque

What is a verb able to be immediately followed by the full or bare infinitive, or gerund?
catenative verb

What is the shortening of a word without changing meaning or part of speech?
clipping

Define ``cognate'' in the context of linguistics.
descended from the same source lexeme of an ancestor language

What is a verb of motion whose motion is unidirectional and expresses a single, completed action in the Slavic languages?
concrete verb

What is the mood of a verb used to signify that something is contingent upon the outcome of something else?
conditional mood

What form of consonant mutation found in certain, particularly Uralic, languages, is historically conditioned by the openness of the following syllable?
consonant gradation

What is a term with two opposite meanings called?
contranym

What is a contranym?
term with two opposite meanings

What is a verb that links and equates its subject with its object? It is also called a ``linking verb.''
copula

What adjective means ``derived from a noun''?
denominal

What verb form indicates a wish?
desiderative

What diacritic ( ¨ ) is placed over a vowel letter to indicate that it is sounded separately?
diaeresis

What is the phonological process whereby one of a pair of similar sounds within a word or phrase becomes dissimilar?
dissimilation

What name is given to one of two (or more) words in a language that have the same etymological root (as in etymon, not root morphemes like Proto-Indo-European roots) but have come to the modern language through different routes?
doublet

What name is given to a term carrying negative connotations or imagery to replace a (more) neutral original?
dysphemism

What stage of gradation in Semitic languages can be used both for a superlative and comparative?
elative

What case expresses ``moving out of''?
elative

What is the removal of a phoneme or sequence of phonemes from a word, particularly at the beginning or end?
elision

What is the phonetic joining of a word with the preceding word?
enclisis

In what nominal compound does one part modify the other, where the modified compound refers to the intended meaning of the compound as a whole?
endocentric

What is the insertion of a phoneme, letter, or syllable into a word, usually to satisfy the phonological constraints of a language or poetic context?
epenthesis

Define ``epicene.''
having a single form for both male and female referents

What case used in some languages marks the subject of a transitive verb, but not the subject of an intransitive verb?
ergative case

What verb can be transitive or intransitive, where the intransitive subject is the patient, the same role as the transitive object?
ergative 

What is an etymon?
the source word of a given word

What is, in languages with matres lectionis (consonant letters representing vowels), a form including one or more additional ones?
excessive spelling

What is a sound in a word without etymological reason, added for articulatory purposes?
excrescent

What is a name for a place, people or language used by foreigners instead of the native-language version?
exonym

What is a deliberate misspelling used in writing to indicate that the speech of a character is vernacular, non-standard, or uneducated?
eye dialect

What name is given to the possessive or genitive construction in Persian?
ezafe

What kind of transitive verb is derived from an adjective or noun and expresses the act of making someone/something have the properties (or have more of the properties) of the base adjective or noun?
factitive

What is a word in a language that bears a phonetic resemblance to a word in another language, often because of a common etymology, but has a different meaning?
false friend

What consonant sound is produced by air flowing through a constriction in the mouth, typically producing a sibilant, hissing, buzzing or otherwise ``rough'' quality?
fricative

What is the phenomenon wherein a consonant is pronounced for an audibly longer period of time than is done normally?
gemination

What verbal aspect specifies an action as occurring habitually? It is often called ``habitual.''
consuetudinal

What is a word that occurs only once within a given corpus, either in the written record of an entire language, in the works of an author, or in a single text? An example is ``νεκραγωγοῦντα.'' 
hapax legomenon

What is the elision or deletion of a part of a word (a sequence of phonemes, or a series of letters) that is repeated (either exactly or with slight change)?
haplology

Define ``hypercorrect.''
incorrect because of the misapplication of a standard rule

In what form of metathesis are non-contiguous sounds switched?
hyperthesis

What is the Arabic possessive or genitive construction called?
ʾiḍāfa

What is a word that evokes an idea in sound, often a vivid impression of certain sensations or sensory perceptions, e.g. sound, movement, colour, shape, or action?
ideophone

What is a word with one or more inflections with more syllables than the lemma form?
imparisyllabic

What mood of a verb expresses an order or command?
imperative

What is a verb that cannot take a subject or takes a third-person neuter subject pronoun (e.g. ``it'') without an antecedent?
impersonal verb

What case is used to express means or agency? Generally, it is indicated in English by ``by'' or ``with'' with the objective.
instrumental

What is an empty morph (or meaningless morph) inserted between two morphemes in the process of word formation?
interfix

What specific occurrence of palatalization occurred in the Proto-Slavic language, in which a consonant combined with the palatal approximant /j/ to form a palatalized consonant?
iotation

What number of inflectional endings sometimes called ``desinetial inflections,'' applied to Arabic nouns, adjectives, and verbs, do not appear in writing --- with minor exceptions --- and are not pronounced in pausa, i.e. at the end of a sentence or before a pause?
ʾiʿrāb

What mood of a verb is used to indicate a command, permission, or agreement with a request?
jussive

What was the classically based artificial (standardized) Greek language created at the start of Greece's independence from the Ottoman Empire? It was used for all formal and official purposes until 1976.
Katharevousa

What metaphorical compound or phrase describes basic objects in an allusive fashion, especially in Germanic poetry?
kenning

What type of Wanderwort is specific to a particular culture or is spread by an influential cross-cultural phenomenon?
Kulturwort

What rhetorical figure involving understatement consists of saying that something has less of one thing to mean more of the opposite?
litotes

What case is used to indicate place or the place where or wherein?
locative

What short, straight, horizontal diacritical mark ( ¯ ) is placed over any of various letters, usually to indicate that the pronunciation of a vowel is long?
macron

What grammatical voice subsumes the meanings of both the middle voice and the passive voice?
mediopassive

What form of understatement that consists of downplaying or diminishing the focal quality of a statement for contrastive, humorous or dramatic effect, sometimes deployed as part of a higher register? One example is saying ``he is somewhat displeased'' instead of ``he is furious.''
meiosis

What name is given to the infix -né- or -n- in Proto-Indo-European --- one of the affixes marking the imperfective aspect?
nasal infix

What is a nonce word?
word invented for the occasion

In Slavic languages, what is a plural gender used for all groups that do not contain men, as well as plurals of masculine animate, masculine inanimate, feminine, and neuter nouns?
nonvirile

What name is given to any case that is neither nominative nor vocative?
oblique/objective

What category of verb form (a mood) expresses wishes along with other meanings?
optative mood

Define ``oxytone.''
with the stress upon the final syllable

What adjective describes a word with the stress upon the final syllable?
oxytone

What is the addition of sounds at the end of a word without changing its morphological structure or meaning?
paragoge

What is a word whose inflections contain the same number of syllables as the lemma form?
parisyllabic

What adjective describes a word with the stress upon the penultimate syllable?
paroxytone

What is the next-to-last syllable of a word?
penultima

What adjective describes using more words to produce a grammatical effect?
periphrastic

What is a consonant sound produced by completely blocking the airflow through the mouth for a short time?
plosive

What verb form of perfect aspect and past tense is used to describe an action or event which is regarded as having been completed in the past, in relation to a time already in the past?
pluperfect

What does ``plurale tantum'' mean?
plural only

What tense shows an action at a determined moment in the past?
preterite

What adjective describes a word with the stress upon the antepenultimate syllable? 
proparoxytone

What name is given to a descendant word in a daughter language, descended from an earlier language?
reflex

What verbal aspect, a subclass of perfective, denotes a momentary or punctual event (e.g. to sneeze, to blink, to knock)?
semelfactive

What is a letter or other symbol that stands for a word or name? For example, ``ꝓ'' is one in medieval Latin for the word ``pro.''
siglum

What does ``s.l.'' abbreviate?
sine locō

In what specific occurrence of palatalization that occurred in the Proto-Slavic language did the velar consonants *k *g *x when followed by any of the front vowels *e *ě *ь *i become the sounds *č *ž *š respectively?
Slavic first palatalization

What does ``s.n.'' abbreviate?
sine nōmine

What type of cliché uses an old idiom formulaically in a new context?
snowclone

What mood of a verb expresses an action or state which is hypothetical or anticipated rather than actual, including wishes and commands?
subjunctive

What is the deletion or elision of sounds inside a word (not at the beginning or end), most often a single vowel, but sometimes a consonant or a sequence of vowels or consonants?
syncope

What is the situation in which two or more inflected forms of a word are identical?
syncretism

What is the aspect of a verb that denotes an action with a definite endpoint or a goal that is tended towards, or rather an action that is quantized (such that the expression for that action may not describe both the action and a smaller part of that same action)?
telic

What is the insertion of one or more words between the components of a compound word?
tmesis

What verb form in some Balto-Slavic languages expresses a coincidentally proceeding or following action?
transgressive

What is a consonant made with the tongue touching the soft palate?
velar

What is another term for the soft palate?
velum

In what type of backslang used in French does the order of the syllables or sounds of words change, usually with the last syllable coming first?
verlan

In Slavic languages, what plural gender is used for groups that include men and for masculine personal nouns?
virile

What is a word form that has spread over a substantial area, or to many regions, outside of that of its language of origin, typically due to cultural exchange resulting from travel and trade?
Wanderwort

In Proto-Indo-European linguistics, what name is given to an ablaut form of a root characterized by the absence of the basic ablauting vowel phonemes */e/ and */o/?
zero-grade

What name is given to an initial ⟨h⟩ that is treated as a consonant?
aspirated h

What name is given to an initial ⟨h⟩ that is treated as a vowel?
mute h

What does ``overmorrow'' mean?
the day after tomorrow

What collective name is given to significant changes to the pronunciation of English that happened between the 15th and 18th centuries?
Great Vowel Shift

What does the samurai never blame?
his sword

What things never lie, according to Tony Montana, Chico?
the eyes

In Monty Python and the Holy Grail, what knights halt King Arthur and his companions in a forest?
the knights who say ``ni!''

What is the English name for the João-de-Barro, which also may be called the ``red ovenbird''?
rufous hornero

Like what do real Gs move in silence?
lasagna

Finish the colloquialism: ``I ran away faster than you could say Jack [---].''
Robinson

(Before and after.) Norwegian mathematician who discovered New Zealand.
Niels Henrik Abel Tasman

Where did Atle Selberg work for most of his academic life?
Institute for Advanced Study

Identify the author. ``Only the silent, sleepy, staring houses in the backwoods can tell all that has lain hidden since the early days; and they are not communicative, being loath to shake off the drowsiness which helps them forget. Sometimes one feels that it would be merciful to tear down these houses, for they must often dream.''
H. P. Lovecraft

What is demagoguery?
political activity or practices that seek support by appealing to the desires and prejudices of ordinary people rather than by using rational argument

What is Emanuel Ax's occupation?
piano playing

What is the nearest integer to the Golomb--Dickman constant?
1

What Spanish philosopher studied at Harvard under William James and Josiah Royce?
George Santayana

``His empire's boundary shall be the Ocean; the only border to his fame, the stars.'' Whom is Jupiter talking about?
Julius Caesar

What duo composed the music for the Halo video games?
Martin O'Donnell, Michael Salvatori

What was Mike Cammalleri's hometown?
Richmond Hill

What NHL team drafted Mike Cammalleri in 2001?
Los Angeles Kings

What team was Mike Cammalleri on when he scored a career-high 82 points in the 2008--09 season?
Calgary Flames

What is a proparoxytone?
word with stress on the antepenultima

What is a properispomenon?
word with a circumflex on the penultima

What is a paroxytone?
word with stress on the penultima

What is a perispomenon?
word with a circumflex on the ultima

What is an oxytone?
word with stress on the ultima

What is a barytone?
word without stress on the ultima

What transposition in Ancient Greek involves a long-short vowel length combination becoming short-long?
quantitative metathesis

What is a fanook?
homosexual

Where is Zakopane?
Poland

What mountain range can one see from Zakopane, Poland?
Tatras

What word was controversially added to the Nicene Creed?
Filioque

Who constructed the theatre at Epidaurus?
Polykleitos the Younger

With what drink are the names Lafite and Rothschild associated?
wine

What is coriander's name in the United States?
cilantro

What is cilantro's name outside of the United States?
coriander

By what nickname are residents of Bures-sur-Yvette known?
Buressois

In what industry did Ingmar Bergman work?
film

What name does a twelve go by in the game of craps?
boxcars

How old was Methuselah when he died?
969

What country houses the city of Hargeisa?
Somalia

Whose embedding theorem says that, for any small abelian category $A$, there is a ring $R$ and a full, faithful, and exact functor from $A$ to the category of $R$-modules?
Barry Mitchell

What two countries are home to the White Carpathians?
Czech Republic, Slovakia

Of what mountain range is Chmeľová part?
White Carpathians

In what country was Stan Mikita born?
Slovakia

Who was the first Slovak-born hockey player to win the Stanley Cup?
Stan Mikita

For what team did Stan Mikita play?
Chicago Blackhawks

Where was Red Kelly born?
Simcoe, Ontario

How many Stanley Cups did Red Kelly win?
eight

For what two teams did Red Kelly play?
Detroit Red Wings, Toronto Maple Leafs

How many Stanley Cups did Red Kelly win while he was a member of Parliament?
two

What number did Red Kelly wear?
4

Where was Terry Sawchuck born?
Winnipeg

How many Stanley Cups did Terry Sawchuck win?
four

What was Terry Sawchuck's position?
goalie

How many shutouts did Terry Sawchuck record?
103

Who was the Stratford Streak?
Howie Morenz

Whose number was the first that the Montreal Canadiens retired?
Howie Morenz

How many Stanley Cups did Howie Morenz win?
three

Who was the Edmonton Express?
Eddie Shore

Where was Eddie Shore born?
Fort Qu'Appelle

What position did Eddie Shore play?
defenceman

How many Hart Trophies did Eddie Shore win?
four

What hockey player who severely injured Ace Bailey shook hands with Bailey at an all-star benefit game for him in 1934?
Eddie Shore

How many Stanley Cups did Eddie Shore win?
two

For what team did Elmer Lach play?
Montreal Canadiens

What players comprised the Punch Line (from left to right)?
Toe Blake, Elmer Lach, Maurice Richard

How many Stanley Cups did Elmer Lach win?
three

What number did Elmer Lach wear?
16

Where was Syl Apps born?
Paris, Ontario

In what sport did Syl Apps win gold at the 1934 British Empire Games? He came sixth in this sport at the 1936 Olympics.
pole vault

Who won the first Calder Memorial Trophy?
Syl Apps

For what team did Syl Apps play?
Toronto Maple Leafs

How many Stanley Cups did Syl Apps win?
three

For what city was Syl Apps an Ontario MPP?
Kingston

Where was Sid Abel born?
Melville, Saskatchewan

What players comprised the Production Line (from left to right)?
Ted Lindsay, Sid Abel, Gordie Howe

What attacking trio was known collectively as ``MSN'' at FC Barcelona?
Leo Messi, Luis Suárez, Neymar

How many Stanley Cups did Sid Abel win?
three

For what two NHL teams did Sid Abel play?
Detroit Red Wings, Chicago Blackhawks

Define ``whittle.''
carve (wood) into an object by repeatedly cutting small slices from it

Who was Mr. Hockey?
Gordie Howe

Who overtook Gordie Howe for most NHL games played in 2021?
Patrick Marleau

How many seasons did Gordie Howe play in the NHL?
26

How many points did Gordie Howe record in his NHL career?
1850

For what team did Gordie Howe play for 25 seasons?
Detroit Red Wings

How many Stanley Cups did Gordie Howe win?
four

Who is Le Gros Bill?
Jean Béliveau

How many Stanley Cups did Jean Béliveau win as a player?
ten

Where was Jean Béliveau born?
Trois-Rivières

Who was the honourary captain of Team Canada's hockey team in the 2010 Winter Olympics?
Jean Béliveau

Where was Father David Bauer born?
Waterloo, Ontario

For what team did Jean Béliveau play?
Montreal Canadiens

To whom does Matt Groening attribute the quote ``Love is a slippery eel that bites like hell''?
Bertrand Russell

To whom does Matt Groening attribute the quote ``Love is like a perky elf dancing a merry little jig and then suddenly he turns on you with a miniature machine gun''?
Søren Kierkegaard

To whom does Matt Groening attribute the quote ``Love is a snowmobile racing across the tundra and then suddenly it flips over, pinning you underneath. At night, the ice weasels come''?
Friedrich Nietzsche

Who proved Serre's epsilon conjecture?
Ken Ribet

Who helped Andrew Wiles notice that there was a gap in the manuscript of his proof of Fermat's last theorem?
Nicholas Katz

Whose paper entitled ``Deforming Galois Representations'' included key ideas used in Wiles's proof of Fermat's last theorem?
Barry Mazur

What two Japanese mathematicians are associated with the modularity theorem linking elliptic curves and modular forms?
Yutaka Taniyama, Goro Shimura

When was Yutaka Taniyama born?
12 November 1927

What is Quebec's motto?
je me souviens

What does ``Je me souviens'' mean in English?
I remember

What is Ontario's motto?
ut incepit fidelis sic permanet

What does ``ut incepit fidelis sic permanet'' mean in English?
loyal she began, loyal she remains

What is Ontario's flower?
white trillium

What is Ontario's tree?
eastern white pine

What is Nova Scotia's motto?
munit hæc et altera vincit

What does ``munit hæc et altera vincit'' mean in English?
one defends and the other conquers

What is Nova Scotia's flower?
mayflower

What is Nova Scotia's tree?
red spruce

What is Nova Scotia's bird?
osprey

What is New Brunswick's motto?
spem reduxit

What does ``spem reduxit'' mean in English?
hope restored

What is New Brunswick's flower?
purple violet

What is New Brunswick's tree?
balsam fir

What is New Brunswick's bird?
black-capped chickadee

What is Manitoba's motto?
gloriosus et liber

What does ``gloriosus et liber'' mean in English?
glorious and free

What is Manitoba's flower?
prairie crocus

What is Manitoba's tree?
white spruce

What is Manitoba's bird?
great grey owl

What is British Columbia's motto?
Splendor sine occasu

What does ``splendor sine occasu'' mean in English?
splendour without diminishment

What is British Columbia's flower?
Pacific dogwood

What is British Columbia's tree?
western red cedar

What is British Columbia's bird?
steller's jay

What is Prince Edward Island's motto?
parva sub ingenti

What does ``parva sub ingenti'' mean in English?
the small protected by the great

What is Prince Edward Island's flower?
pink lady's slipper

What is Prince Edward Island's tree?
red oak

What is Prince Edward Island's bird?
blue jay

What is Saskatchewan's motto?
Multis e gentibus vires

What does ``multis e gentibus vires'' mean in English?
from many people, strength

What is Saskatchewan's flower?
western red lily

What is Saskatchewan's tree?
paper birch

What is Saskatchewan's bird?
sharp-tailed grouse

What is Alberta's motto?
fortis et liber

What does ``fortis et liber'' mean in English?
strong and free

What is Alberta's flower?
wild rose

What is Alberta's tree?
lodgepole pine

What is Alberta's bird?
great horned owl

What is Newfoundland and Labrador's motto?
quaerite prime regnum Dei

What does ``quaerite prime regnum Dei'' mean in English?
seek ye first the kingdom of God

What is Newfoundland and Labrador's flower?
pitcher plant

What is Newfoundland and Labrador's tree?
black spruce

What is Newfoundland and Labrador's bird?
Atlantic puffin

What continent houses the city of Ceuta?
Africa

What is the northernmost town on the west coast of South Africa?
Alexander Bay

Who is Matlock?
Andy Griffith

How many Stanley Cups did Jacques Plante win?
six

What two goalies shared the Vezina Trophy in 1969?
Jacques Plante, Glenn Hall

How many Vezina Trophies did Jacques Plante win?
seven

Who was the first goalie to don a goalie mask?
Jacques Plante

With what NHL team did Phil Esposito win two Stanley Cups?
Boston Bruins

Where was Phil Esposito born?
Sault Ste. Marie

What was the first name of Phil Esposito's brother who was an NHL goalie?
Tony

For what three NHL teams did Phil Esposito play?
Chicago Blackhawks, Boston Bruins, New York Rangers

Who set the record for most shots in an NHL season in 1971?
Phil Esposito

What did the Ted Lindsay Award used to be called?
Lester B. Pearson Award

With what NHL team did Johnny Bucyk win two Stanley Cups?
Boston Bruins

Where was Bobby Orr born?
Parry Sound

Who was the MVP of the inaugural Canada Cup?
Bobby Orr

Who was the MVP of the 1987 Canada Cup?
Wayne Gretzky

Who was the MVP of the 1981 Canada Cup?
Vladislav Tretiak

Who was the MVP of the 1984 Canada Cup?
John Tonelli

Who was the MVP of the 1991 Canada Cup?
Bill Ranford

Who was the only team to win the Canada Cup that was not Canada?
Soviet Union

When did the Soviet Union win the Canada Cup?
1981

How many Stanley Cups did Bobby Orr win?
two

Whose flying goal won the Stanley Cup for the Boston Bruins in 1970?
Bobby Orr

What Boston Bruin defenseman from Parry Sound scored nine hat tricks?
Bobby Orr

How many Art Ross Trophies did Bobby Orr win?
two

What two hockey players did Boston Bruin scout Wren Blair describe Bobby Orr as a combination of?
Doug Harvey, Eddie Shore

What number did Bobby Orr wear?
4

What was Bobby Orr's junior number?
2

What is David Letterman's birthday?
12 April

Where did Alan Eagleson graduate with a law degree?
University of Toronto

To whom did Alan Eagleson lose in the 1963 federal election in York West? 
Red Kelly

What Progressive Conservative did Red Kelly defeat in the 1963 federal election in York West? 
Alan Eagleson

What lawyer who was central in the Summit Series and the Canada Cup was disbarred and had his Order of Canada disannulled after being found guilty of fraud?
Alan Eagleson

Where was Bobby Clarke born?
Flin Flon, Manitoba

For what team did Bobby Clarke play?
Philadelphia Flyers

How many Stanley Cups did Bobby Clarke win?
two

On what junior team did Bobby Clarke play?
Flin Flon Bombers

Who was the captain of the winning Canadian team of the 1976 Canada Cup?
Bobby Clarke

What Canadian tied up the game between Canada and Czechoslovakia in the 1976 Canada Cup near the end of regulation?
Bill Barber

Who scored the winning goal in the  1976 Canada Cup in overtime?
Darryl Sittler

Who was the Flower?
Guy Lafleur

Where was Guy Lafleur born?
Thurso

How many Stanley Cups did Guy Lafleur win?
five

Who was Le Turbo de Thurso?
Guy Lafleur

How many Stanley Cups did Bryan Trottier win as a player?
six

What was Bryan Trottier's junior team?
Swift Current Broncos

For what two NHL teams did Bryan Trottier play?
New York Islanders, Pittsburgh Penguins

Who was the Great One?
Wayne Gretzky

How many goals did Wayne Gretzky score in his career?
894

How many goals did Wayne Gretzky score in the 1981--82 season?
92

How many assists did Wayne Gretzky score in his career?
1963

Who was the Magnificent One?
Mario Lemieux

For what NHL team did Mario Lemieux play?
Pittsburgh Penguins

How many Stanley Cups did Mario Lemieux win as a player?
two

Where was Mark Messier born?
St. Albert, Alberta

How many Stanley Cups did Mark Messier win?
six

How many Stanley Cups did Mark Messier win with the Edmonton Oilers?
five

In what year did Mark Messier win the Conn Smythe?
1984

Where was Brett Hull born?
Belleville, Ontario

Who was Brett Hull's father?
Bobby Hull

Who was the Golden Jet?
Bobby Hull

How many Stanley Cups did Brett Hull win?
two

With what two teams did Brett Hull win the Stanley Cup?
Dallas Stars, Detroit Red Wings

Who was the lead singer and guitarist for Creedence Clearwater Revival?
John Fogerty

For what baseball team did Bob Uecker broadcast? 
Milwaukee Brewers

What catcher and broadcaster for the Milwaukee Brewers routinely appeared on Johnny Carson?
Bob Uecker

Where was David Letterman born?
Indianapolis

What late-night talk show host hosted the most episodes?
David Letterman

Who was Bromios, the thunderer?
Dionysus

What is the tallest mountain in the White Carpathians?
Veľká Javorina

Who did Weekend Update on Saturday Night Live in 1985?
Dennis Miller

Who did Weekend Update on Saturday Night Live in 1993?
Norm Macdonald

What late-night talk show host hosted The Tonight Show from 1962 to 1992? He is routinely considered the best of late-night TV.   
Johnny Carson

Who directed Chariots of fire?
Hugh Hudson

Who were the first ten Fields Medallists to come from the École normale supérieure?
Laurent Schwartz, René Thom, Jean-Pierre Serre, Alain Connes, Pierre-Louis Lions, Jean-Christophe Yoccoz, Laurent Lafforgue, Wendelin Werner, Ngô Bả Châu, Cédric Villani

Who was the original architect of the Empire State Building?
Frank Lloyd Cock

What school originated in 1530 when Francis I was advised to start the creation of a school that would teach topics to royal scholars, that were not taught at the Sorbonne, originally Greek, Hebrew, and mathematics, and then later, French law, Latin, and medicine?
Collège de France

When was Henry IV assassinated?
14 May 1610

Who set down the first stone for the Collège de France?
Louis XIII

Inscribed in this building's first stone were the words ``En l'an premier du Regne de Louis XIII Roy de France et de Navarre, âgé de neuf ans, et de la Regence de la Royne Marie de Médicis sa mère MDCX.'' Identify the building.
Collège de France

What architect continued the construction of the Collège de France around the Cour d'Honneur in 1773?
Jean Chalgrin

What street is home to Le Lycée Louis-le-Grand? 
Rue St Jacques

What Parisian Lycée remained open during the Revolution?
Lycée Louis-le-Grand

When did the Lycée Louis-le-Grand get that name?
1873

What Lycée did Galois attend?
Lycée Louis-le-Grand

What school was created after the French Revolution on 28 September 1794, by Jacques- Élie Lamblardie, Gaspard Monge, and Lazare Carnot, as all the royal engineering schools had previously been closed? The aim of this new establishment was to replace all those schools, but they were later reopened and it was decided that students would have to attend this school before entering the other ones.
École Polytechnique

Who had the easiest autograph?
I. M. Pei

What school located on the site of the Royal Abbaye of Sainte-Genevieve was created by Clovis, King of Francs in 506?
Lycée Henri IV

What Lycée did Cauchy attend?
Lycée Henri IV

Who was Cauchy's professor at Lycée Henri IV?
Jacques Binet

What suffix is used for naming ACE inhibitors?
pril

Of what are lisinopril and benazepril examples?
ACE inhibitors

What suffix is used for naming alpha blockers?
zosin

Of what are terazosin and doxazosin examples?
alpha blockers

What suffix is used for naming angiotensin receptor blockers?
sartan

What suffix is used for naming benzodiazepines?
zepam

Of what are diazepam and clonazepam examples?
benzodiazepines

What suffix is used for naming beta blockers?
olol

Of what are metoprolol and carvedilol examples?
beta blockers

What suffix is used for naming H2 antagonists?
tidine

Of what are famotidine and ranitidine examples?
H2 antagonists

What suffix is used for naming 5HT3 antagonists?
setron

What suffix is used for naming proton pump inhibitors?
prazole

What suffix is used for naming quinolone antibiotics?
floxacin

What suffix is used for naming thiazolidinediones?
glitazone

What suffix is used for naming biphosphonates?
dronate

What suffix is used for naming monoclonal antibodies?
mab

What suffix is used for naming echinocandins?
fungin

What suffix is used for naming corticosteroids?
asone

What suffix is used for naming protease inhibitors?
navir

What suffix is used for naming leukotriene modifiers?
lukast

What suffix is used for naming HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors?
statin

What suffix is used for naming beta-2 agonists?
terol

What suffix is used for naming phosphodiesterase inhibitors?
afil

What suffix is used for naming tricyclic antidepressants?
ipramine

Translate ``Lex orandi, lex credendi.''
law of prayer, law of belief

What musicians feature on DJ Khaled's ``I'm the one''?
Chance the Rapper, Justin Bieber, Lil Wayne, Quavo

What pope issued Summorum Pontificum?
Benedict XVI

Who asks: ``[C]an anybody who takes a survey of the whole [Modernist] system be surprised that We should define it as the synthesis of all heresies?''
Pius X

What pope issued Pascendi Dominici Gregis?
Pius X

What is the ``synthesis of all heresies''?
Modernism

What is the Polish name for Lviv?
Lwów 

What is the German name for Lviv?
Lemberg

Translate ``sine qua non.''
without which not

Translate: ``J'ai crû en sagesse.''
I grew in wisdom

Translate: ``J'ai cru en la conjecture de Hodge.''
I believed in the Hodge conjecture

Translate: ``le cru et le cuit.''
the raw and the cooked

What does a cobbler do?
mends shoes

What is ``the dunny''?
toilet

Who says, tricking the cyclops, ``Οὖτις ἐμοί γ᾽ ὄνομα: Οὖτιν δέ με κικλήσκουσι / μήτηρ ἠδὲ πατὴρ ἠδ᾽ ἄλλοι πάντες ἑταῖροι''?
Odysseus

What Toronto Raptors broadcaster on TSN is known for exclaiming ``Get that garbage outta here!'' in his Brooklyn accent?
Jack Armstrong

What does ``Þjóðvegur'' mean?
national road

Define ``outturn.''
quantity produced; output

Define ``remuneration.''
money paid for work or a service

Define ``concomitant.''
naturally accompanying or associated

What is a sequela?
condition that is the consequence of a previous disease or injury

Who won the 2023 World Series?
Texas Rangers

Define ``fuliginous.''
sooty; dusky

Who wrote ``Raspberry Beret''?
Prince

What American band made the song ``Drive By''?
Train

What does the Ancient Greek ``λεπταλέος'' mean?
fine; delicate

Who wrote The old man and the sea?
Ernest Hemingway

Who in 1547 became Tsar of Russia at 16?
Ivan IV

Who wrote The Great Gatsby?
F. Scott Fitzgerald

What does the ``F'' stand for in ``F. Scott Fitzgerald''?
Francis

Who was the name of the youngest daughter of Tsar Nicholas II?
Anastasia

What isotope was the first to be observed exhibiting superfluidity?
helium-4

Who is described in Judges 6.11?
Gideon

What was Miloš Forman's occupation?
director

What is NPY4R?
pancreatic polypeptide receptor 1

What orchestra did Karel Ančerl direct until his death?
Toronto Symphony Orchestra

Define ``risible.''
inclined to laugh

Who received the phone call from Alexander Graham Bell?
Thomas Watson

What were the first words transmitted over the telephone?
Mr. Watson, come here; I want to see you.

What company issued the first cell phone?
Motorola

How tall was Abraham Lincoln?
6 foot 4

What sport did Abraham Lincoln enjoy?
wrestling

Who was Abraham Lincoln's rival in the debates over slavery?
Stephen Douglas

What government department did Abraham Lincoln establish?
Department of Agriculture

On what money is Abraham Lincoln pictured?
penny, five-dollar bill

For how many years did King George reign?
59 years

Why did King George tax the Americans so heavily?
to fund his seven wars

What two places are associated with ``the shot heard round the world''?
Lexington, Concord

True or false? Thomas Jefferson used a laptop to draft the Declaration of Independence.
true

How long did the Revolutionary War last?
8 years

What is the name of the treaty that ended the Revolutionary War?
Treaty of Paris

In what country was the hot air balloon invented?
France

Who wrote the ``Concord Hymn''?
Ralph Waldo Emerson

What was the last name of the brothers who invented the hot air balloon?
Montgolfier

What were the first names of the Montgolfier brothers who invented the hot air balloon?
Étienne, Joseph-Michel

What state houses Kitty Hawk?
North Carolina 

How long was the Wright Brothers' first flight in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina?
12 seconds

Who invented basketball?
James Naismith

What was the first basketball hoop?
peach basket

In what competition was the first slam dunk?
1936 Olympics

Where were the 1936 Olympics held?
Berlin

What invention was used to make thread?
spinning jenny

After whom is the teddy bear named?
Theodore Roosevelt

By what process did some combinations of words that occurred frequently together coalesce to form a single word in Greek?
crasis

Everyone knows that Patrick Roy was in net for the Avs' two Stanley Cup wins. Which two goalies backed him up?
Stephane Fiset, David Aebischer

Who did the Vancouver Canucks play in their first Stanley Cup Final appearance?
New York Islanders

Who won the Hart Trophy in 1994?
Sergei Fedorov

Who was the first captain of the Avs when they moved to Colorado?
Joe Sakic

Who is the Maple Leafs' all-time leading goal scorer pre-2024?
Mats Sundin

Name the Russian five.
Sergei Fedorov, Slava Fetisov, Vladimir Konstantinov, Slava Kozlov, Igor Larionov

Who were the two NHL players that Andy Warhol painted?
Rod Gilbert, Wayne Gretzky

What landmark featured on Mike Richter's famous goalie mask?
Statue of Liberty

What building is on the Conn Smythe trophy?
Maple Leaf Gardens

What EBUG recorded a win for the Carolina Hurricanes on 22 February 2020 in Toronto?
David Ayres

Who scored the game-winning goal for Sweden in the gold medal game of the 2012 World Juniors?
Mika Zibanejad

Who holds the single-tournament points record at the World Juniors?
Peter Forsberg

Here's a question about the Mighty Ducks movie. In Hans' shop hangs a picture of a goalie wearing a Minnesota Golden Gophers jersey holding the Hobey Baker award. Who is the goalie?
Robb Stauber

Who won the Conn Smythe Trophy in 2000?
Scott Stevens

What's a knuckle-dragger?
stupid or loutish man

What sound, used in the pronunciation of the word ``loch,'' is denoted by ``x'' in the International Phonetic Alphabet?
unvoiced velar fricative

Define ``nascent.''
only recently formed or started, but likely to grow larger quickly

Define ``discursive.''
digressing from subject to subject

What circular aperture in the anterior and medial part of the greater wing of the sphenoid gives passage to the maxillary nerve?
foramen rotundum

What does the Latin masculine adjective ``rotundus'' mean?
round

``The work is crowned by the production of the [---], which, as the materia globosa, stands at the beginning and also at the end, in the form of gold.''
rotundum

``There was something formless yet complete, / That existed before heaven and earth; / Without sound, without substance, / Dependent on nothing, unchanging, / All pervading, unfailing. / One may think of it as the mother of all things under heaven.'' What was Lao-tzu describing?
the t'ai chi

What evergreen tropical American tree (Crescentia cujete) bears fruit in the form of large woody gourds?
calabash

``Draco interfecit se ipsum, maritat se ipsum, impraegnat se ipsum.'' What symbol is being described?
uroboros

Translate ``ἓν τὸ πᾶν.''
the all is one

What is chrysopoeia?
gold making

What shape represents wu ji [無極]?
circle

Whence?
the round

Define ``upbear.''
raise up; support

Translate ``Liebestod.''
love death

What are Isolde's words as the Liebestod takes place?
Mild und leise / wie er lächelt, / wie das Auge / hold er öffnet, --- / seht ihr's, Freunde? / Säh't ihr's nicht? / Immer lichter / wie er leuchtet, / sternumstrahlet / hoch sich hebt? / Seht ihr's nicht? / Wie das Herz ihm / mutig schwillt, / voll und hehr / im Busen ihm quillt? / Wie den Lippen, / wonnig mild, / süsser Atem / sanft entweht: --- / Freunde! Seht! / Fühlt und seht ihr's nicht? / Hör ich nur / diese Weise, / die so wunder --- / voll und leise, / Wonne klagend, / alles sagend, / mild versöhnend / aus ihm tönend, / in mich dringet, / auf sich schwinget, / hold erhallend / um mich klinget? / Heller schallend, / mich umwallend, / sind es Wellen / sanfter Lüfte? / Sind es Wogen / wonniger Düfte? / Wie sie schwellen, / mich umrauschen, / soll ich atmen, / soll ich lauschen? / Soll ich schlürfen, / untertauchen? / Süss in Düften / mich verhauchen? / In dem wogenden Schwall, / in dem tönenden Schall, / in des Weltatems / wehendem All, --- / ertrinken, / versinken, --- / unbewusst, --- / höchste Lust!

Where was Matvei Michkov born?
Perm

Where is Signal Hill?
St. John's, Newfoundland

What city is home to Kula Lotrščak?
Zagreb

What country is home to Hæstahjallafoss?
Iceland

Who won the 2023 Sinquefield Cup?
Fabiano Caruana

Who won the 2015 Sinquefield Cup?
Levon Aronian

From what country does catupiry come?
Brazil

What does the adjective ``gubernatorial'' describe?
governor

In what country was hockey player and coach Paul MacLean born?
France

With what team did Paul MacLean win the Jack Adams Award in 2013?
Ottawa Senators

What Soviet hockey coach won Olympic gold in 1984, 1988, and 1992 and the Canada Cup in 1981?
Viktor Tikhonov

What American TV film that aired in 1983 depicted a fictional nuclear exchange?
The day after

What astronauts were part of the 1972 Apollo 17 mission?
Eugene Cernan, Ronald Evans, Harrison Schmitt

What instrument did Emmanuel Pahud play?
flute

Name the composer of the novella Candide and that of the operetta Candide based on the novella.
Voltaire, Leonard Bernstein

What city contains a neighbourhood named ``Petare''?
Caracas

Who was drafted first overall in Wayne Gretzky's draft year, 1979?
Rob Ramage

Define ``fain.''
pleased or willing under the circumstances

On what date did the Japanese attack Pearl Harbour?
7 December 1941

What cut of beef popular in Brazil is known as a ``rump cap''? 
picanha

From what animal is Adana kebab made?
lamb

Of what two fruits is a tangelo a hybrid?
tangerine, grapefruit

``About 150 years ago, according to legend, a young brave wanted to witness the plunge of countless buffalo as his people drove them to their deaths over the sandstone cliffs. Standing under the shelter of a ledge, like a man behind a waterfall, he watched the great beasts cascade past him. But the hunt was unusually good that day and as the bodies mounted, he became trapped between the animals and the cliff. When his people came to do the butchering, they found him with his skull crushed by the weight of the buffalo.'' What was the name of this site thus named?
Head-Smashed-In Buffalo Jump

Who plays Harold Abrahams in Chariots of fire?
Ben Cross

Where was the beach running scene in Chariots of fire filmed?
St. Andrews, Scotland

In what year is Goya's Third of May painting set?
1808

Where does a general keep his armies?
up his sleevies

What does it mean to sling hash?
serve food at a restaurant

What author's Gregor Samsa wakes up as a bug?
Franz Kafka

Gilbert, your neck reminds me of a typewriter.
Underwood

Who is singular in having made-up children named Dylan, Dagwood, D'Artagnan, and Simon ``Peter''?
Norm Macdonald

On what body of water is the Spanish port of Gijón located?
Bay of Biscay

(1912--88) What Canadian jazz pianist, composer, and arranger began a long association with Miles Davis in 1947, producing albums such as Porgy and Bess (1958) and Sketches of Spain (1959)?
Gil Evans

What venomous beaded lizard (Heloderma suspectum) is native to the south-western United States and Mexico and named after a river in New Mexico and Arizona?
Gila monster

(c. 1539--83) What English explorer claimed Newfoundland for Elizabeth I in 1583, but was lost when his ship foundered in a storm on the way home?
Sir Humphrey Gilbert

(1544--1603) What English physician and physicist discovered how to make magnets, and coined the term ``magnetic pole''? His book De Magnete (1600) is an important early work on physics.
William Gilbert

What former British colony (1915--75) in the central Pacific consisted of two groups of islands --- one of them is part of Kiribati and the other is now Tuvalu.
Gilbert and Ellice Islands

What group of islands, now part of Kiribati, straddles the equator and lies immediately west of the International Date Line? 
Gilbert Islands

What is a gilet?
light sleeveless padded jacket

(1882--1940) The best-known sculptures of this English sculptor, engraver, and typographer are the relief carvings Stations of the Cross (1914--18) at Westminster Cathedral and Prospero and Ariel (1931) on Broadcasting House in London. He designed a popular sans serif typeface that bears his name.
Eric Gill

Who was Australia's prime minister from 2010 to 2013?
Julia Gillard

What o-word is another term for a gill cover --- a flap of skin protecting a fish's gills, typically stiffened by bony plate?
operculum

What type of shoe with laces along the instep and no tongue is used especially for Scottish country dancing?
ghillie

What English county houses Gillingham --- a town on the Medway estuary?
Kent

What g-word may mean ``young sow''?
gilt

(1900--76) What English philosopher attacks the mind–body dualism of Descartes in The concept of mind (1949)? He was a cousin of the astronomer Sir Martin.
Gilbert Ryle

(c. 1465 -- c. 1536) What Portuguese playwright and poet is regarded as Portugal's most important playwright? Many of his works were written to commemorate national or court events and include religious dramas, farces, pastoral plays, and satirical comedies.
Gil Vicente

(1720--93) What English clergyman and naturalist wrote many letters to friends on aspects of natural history in his native village of Selborne, Hampshire? These were published in 1789 as The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne, which has remained in print ever since.
Gilbert White

What does it mean to gild the lily?
to try to improve what is already beautiful or excellent

What name is designated to a device for keeping an instrument such as a compass or chronometer horizontal in a moving vessel or aircraft, typically consisting of rings pivoted at right angles?
gimbal

What is a gimlet eye?
eye with a piercing stare

What is gin and it?
drink of gin and Italian vermouth

What are the gingiva?
the gums

What is the inflammation of the gums called?
gingivitis

What is the anatomical term for a hinge-like joint such as the elbow or knee that allows movement in only one plane?
ginglymus

What deciduous Chinese tree related to the conifers with fan-shaped leaves and yellow flowers has a number of primitive features and is similar to some Jurassic fossils? It is also called a ``maidenhair tree.''
ginkgo

What is a ginnel?
narrow passage between buildings

(1911--95) What American actress and dancer is known for her dancing partnership with Fred Astaire, during which she appeared in musicals including Top Hat (1935)? Her solo acting career included the film Kitty Foyle (1940), for which she won an Oscar.
Ginger Rogers

What is a Casanova?
man notorious for seducing women

(c. 1478--1510) What influential Italian Renaissance painter introduced the small easel picture in oils intended for private collectors? His notable works include The Tempest (c. 1505) and Sleeping Venus (c. 1510).
Giorgione

(c. 1267--1337) What Italian painter introduced a naturalistic style showing human expression.  His notable works include the frescoes in the Arena Chapel, Padua (1305--08), and the church of Santa Croce in Florence (c. 1320).
Giotto

What was Giotto's full name?
Giotto di Bondone

What European space probe photographed the nucleus of Halley's comet in March of 1986?
Giotto

What was Pope Leo X's name?
Giovanni de' Medici

What tussock moth (Lymantria dispar) has a brown male and larger white female, the latter being fully winged but flightless? The caterpillar can be a serious pest of orchards and woodland.
gypsy moth

What white-flowered Eurasian plant of the mint family (Lycopus europaeus) grows in damp habitats?
gypsywort

What is a girandole?
branched support for candles or other lights, which either stands on a surface or projects from a wall

What annual long-distance race for professional cyclists first held in 1909 and taking place primarily on the roads of Italy over a period of about three weeks consists of multiple stages which are separately timed, several of these stages encompassing mountainous terrain?
Giro d'Italia

What is the French name for a chanterelle mushroom?
girolle

What river estuary in south-western France, formed at the junction of the Garonne and Dordogne Rivers, north of Bordeaux, flows north-west for 72 km (45 miles) into the Bay of Biscay?
Gironde

What were members of the French moderate republican Party in power during the Revolution from 1791 to 1793 called?
Girondist

(1452--98) What Italian preacher and religious reformer was a Dominican monk and strict ascetic who became popular for his passionate preaching against immorality and corruption? He became virtual ruler of Florence (1494--95) but in 1497 he was excommunicated and later executed as a heretic?
Girolamo Savonarola

What does it mean to gird one's loins?
prepare oneself for something difficult or challenging

What is the loose white jacket worn in judo called?
gi

(1926--2020) As secretary of state for finance (1959--62) and finance minister (1962--66) under President Charles de Gaulle, this man was responsible for the policies that formed the basis for France's economic growth. He was president from 1974 to 1981. He was a member of the European Parliament (1989--93) and was leader of the centre-right Union pour la démocratie française from 1988 to 1996.
Valéry Giscard d'Estaing

(1857--1903) What English novelist wrote New Grub Street (1891), Born in Exile (1892), and The Private Papers of Henry Ryecroft (1903)?
George Gissing

What is a gitana?
Romani woman or girl from Spain; female Spanish Gypsy

What is a gitano?
Romani man or boy from Spain; male Spanish Gypsy

What is a gîte?
furnished holiday house in France, typically in a rural district

What lute-like medieval stringed instrument was the forerunner of the guitar?
gittern

Who was the Teflon Don?
John Gotti

What did Norm Macdonald give up for Lent in 1997?
powerlifting, lifting of any kind, dressing up like an incubus, feeding his cat, spending thousands of dollars trying to methodically seduce Andy's wife

``There's nothing wrong with being gay unless [---] and then there's something horribly wrong with it.''
you're not gay

In what year did Peter Forsberg play his first NHL game?
1995

Who scored the hockey gold-medal winner in a shootout for Sweden at the 1994 Lillehammer Olympics?
Peter Forsberg

How many Stanley Cups did Peter Forsberg win?
two

With what team did Peter Forsberg win two Stanley Cups?
Colorado Avalanche

What NHL team drafted Eric Lindros?
Quebec Nordiques

Where was Eric Lindros traded after he refused to play for the Quebec Nordiques?
Philadelphia Flyers

In what Russian town was Sergei Fedorov born?
Pskov

Who won the Frank J. Selke Trophy, the Hart Memorial Trophy, and the Lester B. Pearson Award in the 1993--94 NHL season?
Sergei Federov

Who coached the Detroit Red Wings from 1993 to 2002, retiring as a Stanley Cup champion?
Scotty Bowman

On what NHL team did the Russian Five play?
Detroit Red Wings

What coach played the Russian Five in Detroit?
Scotty Bowman

Define ``bravura.''
great technical skill and brilliance shown in a performance or activity

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy and the Lester B. Pearson Award in the 1994--95 NHL season?
Eric Lindros

What year was Eric Lindros's draft year?
1991

What goalie won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1996--97 and 1997--98?
Dominik Hašek

How many Stanley Cups did Dominik Hašek win?
two

How many Vezina Trophies did Dominik Hašek win?
six

For what NHL teams did Dominik Hašek play?
Chicago Blackhawks, Buffalo Sabres, Detroit Red Wings, Ottawa Senators

Where was Dominik Hašek born?
Pardubice

With what team did Dominik Hašek win his two Stanley Cups?
Detroit Red Wings

Where was Jaromír Jágr born?
Kladno

How many Art Ross Trophies did Jaromír Jágr win?
five

How many Stanley Cups did Jaromír Jágr win?
two

With what team did Jaromír Jágr win his two Stanley Cups?
Pittsburgh Penguins

How many more points did Wayne Gretzky score than Jaromír Jágr?
936

Wayne Gretzky got more assists than Jaromír Jágr got points. How many more?
42

The town in which Chris Pronger was born was a goalie who played for the Montreal Canadiens. What was the town's first name?
Ken

Who succeeded Ken Dryden as Canada's Minister of Social Development?
Diane Finley

Who preceded Diane Finley as Canada's Minister of Social Development?
Ken Dryden

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy and the James Norris Memorial Trophy in 1990--2000?
Chris Pronger

Where was Joe Sakic born?
Burnaby

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy, the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy, the Ted Lindsay Award, and the Stanley Cup in 2000--01?
Joe Sakic

What NHL team drafted Joe Sakic?
Quebec Nordiques

How many Stanley Cups did Joe Sakic win?
two

Where was José Théodore born?
Laval

What NHL team drafted José Théodore?
Montreal Canadiens

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy and the Vezina Trophy in the 2001--02 NHL season?
José Théodore

Where was Martin St. Louis born?
Laval

Who won the Art Ross Trophy, the Hart Memorial Trophy, the Ted Lindsay Award, and the Stanley Cup in the 2003--04 NHL season?
Martin St. Louis

Who won the Art Ross Trophy and the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy in 2012--13?
Martin St. Louis

Who won the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy in the 2009--10, 2010--11, and 2012--13 NHL seasons?
Martin St. Louis

Who was Jumbo Joe?
Joe Thornton

Where was Joe Thornton born?
London, Ontario

What NHL team drafted Joe Thornton?
Boston Bruins

Who won the Art Ross Trophy and the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2005--06?
Joe Thornton

What was Bob Hope's signature song?
``Thanks for the Memory''

In what village did Sidney Crosby and Nathan MacKinnon grow up?
Cole Harbour

When was Sidney Crosby born?
7 August 1987

Who won his second Conn Smythe Trophy in two years in the 2016--17 season? He also won the Rocket Richard Trophy this year.
Sidney Crosby

Who won the Ted Lindsay Award in the 2012--13 and 2013--14 NHL seasons?
Sidney Crosby

Who won the Art Ross Trophy, the Hart Memorial Trophy, and the Ted Lindsay Award in the 2006--07 NHL season?
Sidney Crosby

Who won the Rocket Richard Trophy in 2007--08, 2008--09, 2012--13, 2013--14, 2014--15, 2015--16, 2017--18, 2018--19, and 2019--20?
Alexander Ovechkin

Who won the Conn Smythe Trophy in 2017--18?
Alexander Ovechkin

Who won the Calder Memorial Trophy in 2005--06?
Alexander Ovechkin

Who released the jazz album ``Feels So Good'' in 1977?
Chuck Mangione

What was Wolfman Jack's real name?
Robert Weston Smith

What was Burt Mustin's occupation?
actor

Define ``recant.''
say that one no longer holds an opinion or belief, especially one considered heretical

What moves define the O'Kelly Sicilian Defense?
1. e4 c5 2. Nf3 a6

Who wrote the blues standard ``Nobody Knows You When You're Down and Out''?
Jimmie Cox

Who is regarded by many as the greatest popular-music dancer of all time?
Fred Astaire

Who was Lady Day?
Billie Holiday

What does the number of ruffles in a chef's hat represent?
the number of ways he can cook an egg (or any one dish)

Who was the first recorded hockey player to score a Gordie Howe hat trick? He did it for the Toronto Arenas in 1917.
Harry Cameron

What is Pablo Aimar's home country?
Argentina

What is Enzo Francescoli's home country?
Argentina

Who was Rhoda in Rhoda?
Valerie Harper

Who was the voice of Marge Simpson and played Rhoda's sister Brenda in Rhoda?
Julie Kavner

What actress played supporting roles in Carrie and Ferris Bueller's Day Off and also appeared in Planes, Trains, and Automobiles?
Edie McClurg

What was Jimmy Stewart's wife's name?
Gloria

What university has a student publication called ``Golden Words''?
Queen's University

Whence does hallaca come?
Venezuela

Whence does pabellón criollo come?
Venezuela

What was Caligula's name?
Gaius Caesar Augustus Germanicus

By what name is Gaius Caesar Augustus Germanicus better known?
Caligula

What city hosts the annual Panda Game?
Ottawa

Between what two rival universities is the Panda Game played?
Carleton University, University of Ottawa

Who directed, co-wrote, and starred in the film Life is Beautiful?
Roberto Benigni

This film was directed by, co-written by, and starred Roberto Benigni. It concerns Guido Orefice, an Italian Jew searching for work in Arezzo, Tuscany in 1939. He falls in love with and wins over a schoolteacher named Dora. Guido and Dora marry and have a son named Giosuè, and they run a bookstore. In 1944, the Nazis occupy Northern Italy, and Guido, his uncle Eliseo, and Giosuè are seized and to be taken to a concentration camp. Dora volunteers to go with them, but men and women are separated at the camp. Guido sends messages by loudspeaker to assure Dora that he and Giosuè are safe. To shield his son, Guido tells Giosuè that the camp is some complicated game, and the winning prize is a tank. They play the game the whole way through; in the end, the camp is being shut down as the Allies approach. As his final task, Guido tells Giosuè to stay in a box until everyone has left. Guido goes to find Dora, but he is spotted by a German soldier; Guido is ordered to be executed, and, walking to his death, he passes Giosuè one last time and winks at him. Guido is shot and left for dead. The morning after, Giosuè comes out of the box just as a U. S. Army unit led by a tank arrives and liberates the camp. Giosuè is ecstatic that he won the game, and an American soldier allows Giosuè to ride on the tank. Giosuè espies Dora proceeding out of the camp, and he and his mother are reunited, telling her that he won a tank as his father promised. Name the film.
Life is Beautiful

What is a canary in the coal mine?
early indicator of potential danger or failure

What is the graybar hotel?
jail

What is bedlam?
scene of uproar and confusion

What is a shoo-in?
someone who is certain to win an election or a competition

What actress married Frank Sinatra in 1966 and, after their divorce, married André Previn in 1970?
Mia Farrow

What is a jerry can meant to contain?
fuel

What is the Palio di Siena?
horse race

What are the seventeen contrade of Siena?
Aquila, Bruco, Chiocciola, Civetta, Drago, Giraffa, Istrice, Leocorno, Lupa, Nicchio, Oca, Onda, Pantera, Selva, Tartuca, Torre, Valdimontone

What Japanese prefecture shares its name with a city in Kerala, India?
Kochi

What country's Falcón State is home to Morrocoy National Park and Cayo Sombrero?
Venezuela

Where is Patsy's?
New York City

At what hidden platform at King's Cross Station did the students of Hogwarts board the Hogwarts Express to attend school?
9 3/4

What pitcher threw a no-hitter on LSD?
Dock Ellis

To what song on the radio did Harry Potter and Hermione Granger dance on their hunt for the Horcruxes?
O Children

Where was Phil Hartman born?
Brantford, Ontario

What pope with the bull Pie postulatio voluntatis established formally the Knights Hospitaller?
Paschal II

Who has been the colour commentator for the Boston Bruins since 2005?
Jack Edwards

What is Mother Nature’s Stairmaster?
Grouse Grind

In what work does Plato ``[present] an elaborately wrought account of the formation of the universe and an explanation of its impressive order and beauty''? ``The universe, he proposes, is the product of rational, purposive, and beneficent agency. It is the handiwork of a divine Craftsman (ὁ δημιουργὸς, 28a6) who, imitating an unchanging and eternal model, imposes mathematical order on a pre-existent chaos to generate the ordered universe (ἡ κόσμος). The governing explanatory principle of the account is teleological: the universe as a whole as well as its various parts are so arranged as to produce a vast array of good effects. For Plato, this arrangement is not fortuitous, but the outcome of the deliberate intent of Intellect (ὁ νοῦς), anthropomorphically represented by the figure of the Craftsman who plans and constructs a world that is as excellent as its nature permits it to be'' (Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy).
Timaeus

What is Mike Emrick's nickname?
Doc

What does it mean to be three sheets to the wind?
drunk

What letter whose name means ``hook'' appears in Semitic abjads?
waw

What two Japanese prefectures house Sanriku Fukkō National Park?
Iwate, Miyagi

What Russian film was shot in the Winter Palace of the Hermitage Museum on 23 December 2001 in one take?
Russian Ark

What Calgary Flame scored 66 goals in the 1982--83 NHL season?
Lanny McDonald

Define ``connive.''
secretly allow (something immoral, illegal, or harmful) to occur

Where does a bosun work?
deck of a ship

What is the north forty, idiomatically?
farms, ranches, or agricultural land

Define ``plaintive.''
sounding sad and mournful

Whence do Cheech and Chong come?
Vancouver

What region of ancient Greece housed Cholleidae?
Attica

Who wrote the short story «Много ли человеку земли нужно?» ``How much land does a man require?'' in 1886?
Leo Tolstoy

Who directed the 1996 film Twister?
Jan de Bont

What city is closest to Monkland, Ontario?
Cornwall

Who played Oldie Olsen?
William Preston

What was Leelee Sobieski's occupation?
actress

What was Herodotus's hometown?
Halicarnassus

Who was the first NHL player after Pavel Bure to have back-to-back 50-goal seasons?
Dany Heatley

Who scored 50 in '07?
Dany Heatley

What states contain the driftless region?
Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, Wisconsin

True or false? The northernmost part of Brazil is closer to Canada than it is to the southernmost part of Brazil.
true

What unit is defined to be one centimetre per second squared?
gal

What historical unit, the reciprocal of one ohm (that is, one siemens), is written as an upside-down capital omega?
mho

Translate ``amoris laetitia.''
the joy of love

Translate literally ``tu quoque.''
you likewise

What is tu quoque?
retort charging an adversary with being or doing what the adversary criticizes in others

Define ``chutzpah.''
extreme self-confidence or audacity

What male demon of folklore sought to have sexual intercourse with sleeping women?
incubus

What was vaudeville?
type of entertainment popular chiefly in the US in the early 20th century, featuring a mixture of speciality acts such as burlesque comedy and song and dance

Who was The Fonz?
Arthur Fonzarelli

Who played the girl in the Ferrari in National Lampoon's Vacation?
Christie Brinkley

Whose development of dry breakfast cereals was largely responsible for the creation of the flaked-cereal industry?
John Harvey Kellogg

Translate ``γνῶθι σεαυτόν.''
know thyself

Translate ``θάλασσα καὶ πῦρ καὶ γυνή, κακὰ τρία.''
sea and fire and woman: three evils

What Greek poet active circa the sixth century BC was known for his beatitudes and an early subject of study for Nietzsche?
Theognis

What is the name of the Greek letter that stood for the voiced labial-velar approximant ⟨w⟩?
digamma 

What numeral did digamma (Ϝ) stand for in Greek?
six

What name does one use to reference the Greek letter eta when it functioned as a consonant h?
heta

What was the ancient alternative for the Greek sigma (Ϻ) that resembled a capital mu?
san

What early Greek letter (Ϙ) used for the consonant k before omicron, upsilon, and omega now appears in an altered form (ϟ) as the Greek numeral for 90? Eventually, the letter kappa replaced it, but the letter remained a symbol for Corinth since it had the spelling ``Ϙόρινθος.''
koppa

What early Greek letter (Ͳ) represented a sibilant sound and now appears rarely in an altered form (ϡ) as the Greek numeral for 900?
sampi

What is the ligature ϛ of the Greek letters sigma and tau called? 
stigma

Who found Nestor's Cup in 1954?
Georgio Buchner

Who penned All the King's Men?
Robert Penn Warren

What two cities does Charles Dickens's ``A Tale of Two Cities'' concern?
London, Paris

Who composed ``Evening Beat,'' the piece that became the Hartford Whalers's ``Brass Bonanza''?
Jacques Ysaÿe

What Greek ligature (ϗ) abbreviates the word ``and'' in Greek?
kai

Define ``oneiric.''
relating to dreams or dreaming

Who has won the most NBA championships as a player with eleven?
Bill Russell

What three counties comprise the Oklahoma Panhandle?
Cimarron, Texas, Beaver

What state contains the salient that was once known as ``No Man's Land''? 
Oklahoma

What were the first names of the Sedin twins?
Daniel, Henrik

For what NHL team did the Sedin twins play?
Vancouver Canucks

What number did Daniel Sedin wear?
22

What number did Henrik Sedin wear?
33

Where were the Sedin twins born?
Örnsköldsvik, Sweden

Who is younger: Henrik Sedin or Daniel Sedin?
Daniel Sedin

For what team in the Swedish Elite League did the Sedin twins play?
Modo

Who won the Art Ross Trophy in the 2010--11 NHL season?
Daniel Sedin

Who won the King Clancy Memorial Trophy in the 2017--18 NHL season?
Daniel Sedin, Henrik Sedin

Who won the Art Ross Trophy and the Hart Memorial Trophy in the 2009--10 NHL season?
Henrik Sedin

Where was Corey Perry born?
New Liskeard, Ontario

What NHL team drafted Corey Perry in 2003?
Mighty Ducks of Anaheim

For what OHL team did Corey Perry play?
London Knights

Who was the MVP of the OHL playoffs in the 1998--99 season?
Justin Papineau

Who was the MVP of the OHL playoffs in the 1999--2000 season?
Brian Finley

Who was the MVP of the OHL playoffs in the 2002--03 season?
Derek Roy

Who was the MVP of the OHL playoffs in the 2004--05 season?
Corey Perry

Who was the MVP of the OHL playoffs in the 2006--07 season?
Marc Staal

Who was the MVP of the OHL playoffs in the 2008--09 season?
Taylor Hall

Who was the MVP of the OHL playoffs in the 2009--10 season?
Adam Henrique

Who was the MVP of the OHL playoffs in the 2012--13 season?
Bo Horvat

Who was the MVP of the OHL playoffs in the 2013--14 season?
Robby Fabbri

Who was the MVP of the OHL playoffs in the 2014--15 season?
Connor McDavid

Who was the MVP of the OHL playoffs in the 2015--16 season?
Mitch Marner

Who won the first Hart Memorial Trophy?
Frank Nighbor

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1923--24?
Frank Nighbor

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1924--25?
Billy Burch

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1925--26?
Nels Stewart

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1926--27?
Herb Gardiner

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1927--28?
Howie Morenz

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1928--29?
Roy Worters

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1929--30?
Nels Stewart

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1930--31?
Howie Morenz

Who was the first to win two Hart Memorial Trophies?
Nels Stewart

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1931--32?
Howie Morenz

Who was the first to win three Hart Memorial Trophies?
Howie Morenz

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1932--33?
Eddie Shore

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1933--34?
Aurèle Joliat

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1934--35?
Eddie Shore

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1935--36?
Eddie Shore

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1936--37?
Babe Siebert

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1937--38?
Eddie Shore

Who was the first to win four Hart Memorial Trophies?
Eddie Shore

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1938--39?
Toe Blake

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1939--40?
Ebbie Goodfellow

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1940--41?
Bill Cowley

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1941--42?
Tommy Anderson

Who was the first goalie to win the Hart Memorial Trophy?
Roy Worters

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1942--43?
Bill Cowley

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1943--44?
Babe Pratt

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1944--45?
Elmer Lach

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1945--46?
Max Bentley

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1946--47?
Maurice Richard

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1947--48?
Buddy O'Connor

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1948--49?
Sid Abel

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1949--50?
Chuck Rayner

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1950--51?
Milt Schmidt

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1951--52?
Gordie Howe

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1952--53?
Gordie Howe

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1953--54?
Al Rollins

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1954--55?
Ted Kennedy

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1955--56?
Jean Béliveau

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1956--57?
Gordie Howe

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1957--58?
Gordie Howe

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1958--59?
Andy Bathgate

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1959--60?
Gordie Howe

Who was the first to win five Hart Memorial Trophies?
Gordie Howe

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1960--61?
Bernie Geoffrion

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1961--62?
Jacques Plante

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1962--63?
Gordie Howe

Who was the first to win six Hart Memorial Trophies?
Gordie Howe

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1963--64?
Jean Béliveau

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1964--65?
Bobby Hull

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1965--66?
Bobby Hull

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1966--67?
Stan Mikita

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1967--68?
Stan Mikita

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1968--69?
Phil Esposito

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1969--70?
Bobby Orr

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1970--71?
Bobby Orr

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1971--72?
Bobby Orr

What were the first names of the Hart Memorial Trophy winners from the 1969--70 season to the 1986--87 season?
Bobby, Phil, Guy, Bryan, Wayne

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1972--73?
Bobby Clarke

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1973--74?
Phil Esposito

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1974--75?
Bobby Clarke

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1975--76?
Bobby Clarke

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1976--77?
Guy Lafleur

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1977--78?
Guy Lafleur

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1978--79?
Bryan Trottier

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1979--80?
Wayne Gretzky

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1980--81?
Wayne Gretzky

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1981--82?
Wayne Gretzky

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1982--83?
Wayne Gretzky

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1983--84?
Wayne Gretzky

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1984--85?
Wayne Gretzky

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1985--86?
Wayne Gretzky

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1986--87?
Wayne Gretzky

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1987--88?
Mario Lemieux

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1988--89?
Wayne Gretzky

Who was the first to win seven Hart Memorial Trophies?
Wayne Gretzky

Who was the first to win eight Hart Memorial Trophies?
Wayne Gretzky

Who was the first to win nine Hart Memorial Trophies?
Wayne Gretzky

How many Hart Memorial Trophies did Wayne Gretzky win?
nine

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1989--90?
Mark Messier

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1990--91?
Brett Hull

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1991--92?
Mark Messier

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1992--93?
Mario Lemieux

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1993--94?
Sergei Fedorov

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1994--95?
Eric Lindros

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1995--96?
Mario Lemieux

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1996--97?
Dominik Hašek

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1997--98?
Dominik Hašek

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1998--99?
Jaromír Jágr

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 1999--2000?
Chris Pronger

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2000--01?
Joe Sakic

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2001--02?
José Théodore

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2002--03?
Peter Forsberg

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2003--04?
Martin St. Louis

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2005--06?
Joe Thornton

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2006--07?
Sidney Crosby

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2007--08?
Alexander Ovechkin

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2008--09?
Alexander Ovechkin

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2009--10?
Henrik Sedin

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2010--11?
Corey Perry

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2011--12?
Evgeni Malkin

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2012--13?
Alexander Ovechkin

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2013--14?
Sidney Crosby

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2014--15?
Carey Price

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2015--16?
Patrick Kane

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2016--17?
Connor McDavid

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2017--18?
Taylor Hall

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2018--19?
Nikita Kucherov

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2019--20?
Leon Draisaitl

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2020--21?
Connor McDavid

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2021--22?
Auston Matthews

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy in 2022--23?
Connor McDavid

How many Hart Memorial Trophies did Howie Morenz win?
three

How many Hart Memorial Trophies did Eddie Shore win?
four

How many Hart Memorial Trophies did Gordie Howe win?
six

How many Hart Memorial Trophies did Bobby Orr win?
three

How many Hart Memorial Trophies did Bobby Clarke win?
three

How many Hart Memorial Trophies did Guy Lafleur win?
two

How many Hart Memorial Trophies did Mark Messier win?
two

How many Hart Memorial Trophies did Mario Lemieux win?
three

How many Hart Memorial Trophies did Dominik Hašek win?
two

Where was Evgeni Malkin born?
Magnitogorsk

Who was drafted first in the 2004 NHL Entry Draft?
Alexander Ovechkin

Who was drafted second in the 2004 NHL Entry Draft?
Evgeni Malkin

Who won the Art Ross Trophy, Hart Memorial Trophy, and Ted Lindsay Award in the 2011--12 NHL season?
Evgeni Malkin

Who won the Conn Smythe Trophy in the 2008--09 NHL season?
13003

Who won the Calder Memorial Trophy in 2006--07?
Evgeni Malkin

Who won the Hart Memorial Trophy, Ted Lindsay Award, Vezina Trophy, and William M. Jennings Trophy in the 2014--15 NHL season?
Carey Price

For what NHL team did Carey Price play?
Montreal Canadiens

Who was Team Canada's netminder at the 2014 Winter Olympics?
Carey Price

What three goaltenders went to the 2014 Winter Olympics for Canada?
Carey Price, Mike Smith, Roberto Luongo

Who won the Conn Smythe Trophy in the 2012--13 NHL season?
Patrick Kane

What land was Juno's favourite according to The Aeneid?
Carthage

Which is the loveliest of the twice-seven nymphs that Juno offers Aeolus to shipwreck her enemies sailing over the Tyrrhenian?
Deiopea

When was Vladimir the Great baptized?
988

Where was Vladimir the Great baptized?
Chersonesus

What is a breaker?
heavy sea wave that breaks into white foam on the shore

What was a galley?
low, flat ship with one or more sails and up to three banks of oars

What does ``insolent'' mean?
showing a rude and arrogant lack of respect

What is a rabble?
disorderly crowd or mob

What is a firebrand?
piece of burning wood

What is a crag?
steep or rugged cliff or rock face

Where was the Danzig Corridor?
Poland

What city was east of the Polish Corridor?
Danzig

What dry, flammable material, such as wood or paper, is used for lighting a fire?
tinder

Where was Latium?
Italy

What is the Latin name for Lazio?
Latium

Who founded Alba Longa?
Ascanius

How long is a lustrum?
five years

What purificatory sacrifice in Rome was made after a census every five years?
lustrum

Whom is Virgil talking about here? ``[I]mperium oceano, famam qui terminet astris.''
Julius Caesar

Whence did Teucer come?
Crete

What direction was the wind Aparctias?
north

What direction was the wind Meses?
north-north-east

What direction was the wind Caecias?
north-east

What direction was the wind Apeliotes?
east

What direction was the wind Eurus?
south-east

What direction was the wind Notos?
south

What direction was the wind Lips?
south-west

What direction was the wind Zephyrus?
west

What direction was the wind Argestes?
north-west

What direction was the wind Thrascias?
north-north-west

What are the subunits of the heterotrimer RPA, named after their molecular weights?
RPA70, RPA32, RPA14

What is a ute in Australia?
utility truck

Whence is an Argive?
Argos

Define ``brazen.''
bold and without shame

Of what is something brazen made?
brass

What ornamented staff is carried by rulers on ceremonial occasions as a symbol of sovereignty?
sceptre

What does it mean to brandish something?
wave or flourish it as a threat or in anger or excitement

Whom was Aeneas the son of?
Anchises, Aphrodite

Whom was Agenor the son of?
Poseidon, Libya

Who was the wealthiest landowner in Phoenicia and the husband of Dido?
Sychaeus

What figure of Greek myth fell in love with his statue?
Pygmalion

What does βύρσα mean?
oxhide

Who was Paphos's father?
Pygmalion

What does it mean to hew something?
to chop or cut it with an axe, pick, or other tool

Who was Hector's father?
Priam

Who was Hector's mother?
Hecuba

Who was the queen of the Amazons?
Penthesilea

Define ``goad.''
provoke or annoy (someone) to stimulate some action or reaction

What herbaceous plant or shrub with bold flower spikes and spiny decorative leaves is native to Mediterranean regions? Its name comes from the Greek for ``thorn.''
acanthus

Who was the eldest of Priam's daughters?
Ilione

What is guile?
sly or cunning intelligence

The leaves of this aromatic southern European plant of the mint family are used as a culinary herb. One might use its name as a substitute for ``oregano.''
marjoram

What two-word anagram of ``velamina'' does one exclaim to convey surprise?
man alive

This rich fabric is woven with a raised pattern, typically with gold or silver thread. Its name comes from the Italian for ``twisted thread.'' What is it?
brocade

Define ``sate.''
satisfy a desire or an appetite to the full

What is an egghead?
highly academic or studious person

What is a ham and egg man?
ordinary man

How many days ago was ereyesterday?
two

What were Hale and Bopp's first names?
Alan, Thomas

What does ``CTP'' abbreviate in biochemistry?
cytidine triphosphate

What is the Turkish name for the island Tenedos?
Bozcaada

What is the Greek name for the island Bozcaada?
Tenedos

According to the Aeneid, where did the Greeks hide their fleet to trick the Trojans?
Tenedos

Who in the Aeneid advised the Trojans not to receive the horse from the Greeks?
Laocoön

Who wrote De Consolatione Philosophiae?
Boethius

Translate ``πόρισμα.''
corollary

In what country was Cary Grant born?
England

What was Josef Hofmann's occupation?
pianist

What are the two runes bound together in Bluetooth's logo?
hagall, bjarkan

Switch a letter in the name of a creator god in Hinduism to get the name of this German composer.
Brahms

Whence did Gordon Lightfoot hail?
Orillia

What NHL hockey team has an association with Blasty?
Calgary Flames

Who was the oldest player to win the Calder Memorial Trophy?
Sergei Makarov

How many goals did Teemu Selanne score in his rookie season in the NHL?
76

Who was the Pocket Rocket?
Henri Richard

How many Stanley Cups did Henri Richard win?
11

How many strings are on a concert harp?
47

What instrument represents the wolf in Peter and the Wolf?
French horn

What composer's Mysterium was to be performed at the end of the world?
Scriabin

What does ``Texas'' mean in Norway?
crazy

What does it mean to spin a yarn?
to tell a long, far-fetched story

What is an aberration?
departure from what is normal, usual, or expected

What is a foible?
minor weakness or eccentricity in someone's character

What is the weaker part of a sword blade from the middle to the point in fencing?
foible

From the Aramaic for ``riches,'' what noun represents wealth regarded as an evil influence or false object of worship and devotion?
mammon

Define ``diffident.''
modest or shy because of a lack of self-confidence

What is inheritage?
inheritance

What are bangers?
sausages

Define ``perfidious.''
deceitful and untrustworthy

Translate ``confiteor.''
I confess

Translate: ``ἐλέησόν με κύριε.''
have mercy on me, Lord

What does ``Κύριε, ἐλέησον'' mean?
Lord, have mercy

What does ``Dóminus vobíscum'' mean?
the Lord be with you

Switch a letter in the name of a light canvas shoe with a plaited fibre sole to get this name for a French squadron of aircraft.
escadrille

Switch a letter in the name of a light canvas shoe with a plaited fibre sole to get this name for a French squadron of aircraft.
escadrille

Switch a letter in the name of a tool resembling a large corkscrew for boring holes in wood to get this verb meaning ``portend a good or bad outcome.''
augur

What purported transitional link was discovered by Charles Dawson in 1912 and later determined to be forged?
Piltdown Man 

Who initiated the Mississippi scheme?
John Law

Who was Mr. Warmth?
Don Rickles

Complete the show business maxim: ``Never follow [---].''
the leader of the free world

Where did St. Thomas Aquinas decease?
Fossanova Abbey

(Before and after.) Advisor to Woodrow Wilson and Franklin D. Roosevelt who wrote Ethics and Theological-Political Treatise.
Bernard Baruch Spinoza

How many points are in a pica?
12

What unit of type size and line length is equal to 12 points?
pica

What size of letter in typewriting has 10 characters to the inch?
pica

Who was the inventor of impieties?
Ulysses

What is an auspice?
divine or prophetic token

What does ``pica'' mean in Latin?
magpie

What is the lengthwise timber or steel structure along the base of a ship?
keel

What is an effigy?
sculpture or model of a person

Who tricks the Trojans into bringing the wooden horse into the city?
Sinon

Define ``insidious.''
proceeding in a gradual, subtle way, but with very harmful effects

What was Laocoön sacrificing upon the customary altars when two snakes with endless coils struck a straight line toward him?
giant bull

Who was named the priest of Neptune by lot?
Laocoön

According to the Aeneid, what captains exited the Trojan horse?
Thessandrus, Sthenelus

According to the Aeneid, what Trojan was the first to exhort his countrymen to bring the horse into the city?
Thymoetes

What Trojan priest of Apollo and son of Othrys laments his and Troy's fates holding his baby grandson in his arms?
Panthus

What son of Achilles killed Priam and Polites?
Pyrrhus

Who built the Trojan horse?
Epeos

What is the portion of a ship's bow above water?
prow

Define ``unkempt.''
having an untidy or dishevelled appearance

Whom does Aeneas see in his sleep telling him to escape Troy?
Hector

Who was the goddess of the hearth and household?
Vesta

Define ``hurtle.''
move or cause to move at high speed, typically in an uncontrolled manner

``How fine a thing it is to die in arms.'' Who says this?
Aeneas

What neume denotes a set of three tones that first fall from the original tone, then rise?
porrectus

What is another name for a porrectus?
flexus resupinus

What word is used in anatomy to mean a sharp tip or in music to mean a neume representing a single tone?
punctum

What type of note used in plainsong notation has a tail and represents a single tone?
virga

What neume represents two notes ascending?
podatus/pes

What is another word for a podatus?
pes

What neume represents two notes descending?
clivis

What is another word for a clivis?
flexa

What neume represents an ascending set of three tones?
scandicus

What neume that consists of an ascending group of three notes resembles the scandicus but has the second note emphasized?
salicus

What neume denotes a descending set of three tones?
climacus

What neume denotes a set of three tones that first rise from the original tone, then fall?
torculus

What is another name for a torculus?
pes flexus

What neume represents four notes going up and then dropping down?
scandicus flexus

What is a porrectus with a low note on the end?
porrectus flexus

What is the opposite of a scandicus flexus?
climacus resupinus

What neume represents four notes with the structure low-up-down-up?
torculus resupinus

What neume might one describe as ``one up, two down''?
pes subbipunctus

What neume represents four notes going downward?
virga subtripunctis

What neume represents four notes going upward?
virga praetripunctis

What is the plural of ``quilisma''?
quilismata

What is ʕ?
voiced pharyngeal fricative

Translate the German word ``Übung'' into English.
exercise

What three gifts did the three wise men bring?
gold, frankincense, myrrh

What was the first film in which Daniel Craig played James Bond?
Casino Royale 

From what fish does caviar come?
sturgeon

Where was Muhammad Ali born?
Louisville, Kentucky

What was Tiger Woods's given name?
Eldrick Tont Woods

Translate the Latin word ``stapes'' into English.
stirrup

How many keys does a piano have?
eighty-eight

What is the French name for the Eurasian skylark?
Alouette des champs

What city contains the road junction named ``Seven Dials''?
London

Where does the Burnley Football Club play its home games?
Turf Moor

What NHL team drafted Alexei Kasatonov?
New Jersey Devils

Of what river is the Khemchik a tributary?
Yenisei

Change one letter in the name for a musical ornament to get this adjective describing something, like humour, with a sharp or critical quality.
mordant

Add a letter to a verb tied to sickness to get the name of this black Eurasian and North African bird of the crow family, with a downcurved bill and broad, rounded wings, that typically frequents mountains and sea cliffs.
chough

Who were the Broad Street Bullies?
Philadelphia Flyers

What is the difference between Kac--Moody algebras and generalized Kac--Moody algebras?
generalized Kac--Moody algebras may have imaginary simple roots

What is the scientific name for the European goldfinch?
Carduelis carduelis

Replace ``gun'' in a familiar expression with a nautical term to get this expression that means ``an objectionable, despicable person.''
son of a sea-cook

What was Gerald Ford's middle name?
Rudolph

What Saturday Night Live comedian impersonated Gerald Ford?
Chevy Chase

What island is home to Mount Dempo?
Sumatra

What is the scientific name for the Icterine warbler?
Hippolais icterina

Whence did Victor Kac receive his PhD?
Lomonosov Moscow State University

What Twain book contains the story of grandfather's old ram?
Roughing It

Who won in the Battle of the Plains of Abraham?
the British

Who were the two generals, one Brit and one Frenchman, who died in the Battle of the Plains of Abraham?
James Wolfe, Louis Montcalm

Where is Churchill Downs?
Louisville, Kentucky

What was the Fourth Ecumenical Council?
Council of Chalcedon

What was the First Ecumenical Council?
First Council of Nicaea

What was the Second Ecumenical Council?
First Council of Constantinople

What was the Third Ecumenical Council?
Council of Ephesus

What was the Fifth Ecumenical Council?
Second Council of Constantinople

What was the Sixth Ecumenical Council?
Third Council of Constantinople

What was the Seventh Ecumenical Council?
Second Council of Nicaea

Where was the Qunisext Council held?
Constantinople

Who convoked the Quinisext Council?
Justinian II

What is the German name for Iași?
Jassy

Who convoked the Great Moscow Synod?
Alexis of Russia

Who convoked the Synod of Jerusalem?
Dositheus II of Jerusalem

Who convoked the Synod of Jassy?
Parthenius I of Constantinople

Who convoked the First Council of Nicaea?
Constantine I

Who convoked the First Council of Constantinople?
Theodosius I

Who convoked the Council of Ephesus?
Theodosius II

Who convoked the Council of Chalcedon?
Marcian

Who convoked the Second Council of Constantinople?
Justinian I

Who convoked the Third Council of Constantinople?
Constantine IV

Who convoked the First Lateran Council?
Callixtus II

Who convoked the Second Lateran Council?
Innocent II

Who convoked the Third Lateran Council?
Alexander III

Who convoked the Fourth Lateran Council?
Innocent III

Who convoked the First Council of Lyon?
Innocent IV

Who convoked the Second Council of Lyon?
Gregory X

Who convoked the Council of Vienne?
Clement V

Who convoked the Council of Florence?
Martin V

Who convoked the Fifth Lateran Council?
Julius II

Who presided over the Fifth Lateran Council when Julius II died?
Leo X

What pope used the Italian word ``aggiornamento'' in an address on the Second Vatical Council?
John XXIII

Who are the three men who have been given the title ``Theologian'' in the Orthodox Church?
John the Apostle, Gregory of Nazianzus, Symeon

What monk of Mount Athos known as ``a New Chrysostom'' defended Hesychasm against Barlaam of Seminara?
Gregory Palamas

Where was the Philokalia published in 1782?
Venice

From what Italian region does agnolotti come?
Piedmont

What is bravado?
blustering swaggering conduct

What does ``Sonderstellung'' mean?
special place

What is Gewissenbisse?
pangs of conscience

What are the four imperial cities of Morocco?
Fez, Marrakesh, Meknes, Rabat

What Kurt Vonnegut novel is subtitled ``Or, The Children's Crusade: A Duty-Dance with Death''?
Slaughterhouse-Five

Who wrote the story ``The Birds'' that inspired Alfred Hitchcock's film of the same name?
Daphne du Maurier

What English county contains the towns of Tewkesbury and Tetbury?
Gloucestershire

The name of this Mexican isthmus comes from the Nahuatl for ``jaguar mountain''?
Isthmus of Tehuantepec

What name was given to the Greek dance from Zorba the Greek that accompanied Mikis Theodorakis's ``Zorba's Dance''?
sirtaki

Who directed Rosemary's Baby?
Roman Polanski

Who played Rosemary in Rosemary's Baby?
Mia Farrow

Where is Thomas Jefferson buried?
Monticello, Virginia

Which is the only Canadian Prime Minister not buried on Canadian soil?
R. B. Bennett

What does ``ingravidate'' mean?
impregnate

Where was Brian Mulroney born?
Baie-Comeau, Quebec

What Progressive Conservative was the eighteenth prime minister of Canada?
Brian Mulroney

Was Dr. No an Ian Fleming story?
yes

Who created James Bond?
Ian Fleming

Was License to Kill an Ian Fleming story?
no

Who is considered the first named author?
Enheduanna

Who was Enheduanna's father?
Sargon of Akkad

What does ``SACD'' abbreviate?
super audio compact disk

(Before and after.) Canadian mixed martial artist who established the Domaine musical.
Georges Saint-Pierre Boulez

(Before and after.) Author of Samson Agonistes and Areopagitica who became a serialist composer of electronic music.
John Milton Babbitt

What animal is White Fang?
wolfdog

What sport does Mitchell Starc play professionally?
cricket

What countries face off in the Ashes?
Australia, England

What does ħ represent in the International Phonetic Alphabet?
voiceless pharyngeal fricative

A movement of a famous composition by Olivier Messiaen comes from the fourth movement of the composer's Fête des belles eaux for six ondes Martenots. What was this famous composition, and which of its movements came from Fête des belles eaux?
Quatuor pour la fin du temps, fifth 

Define ``pugnacious.''
eager or quick to argue, quarrel, or fight

Which American president was Old Granny?
William Henry Harrison

Where is Manx spoken?
the Isle of Man

What are the dimensions of a snooker table?
twelve feet by six feet

How many points does one get after a maximum break in snooker?
147

Which Drake album had the singles Started from the Bottom and Hold On, We're Going Home?
Nothing Was the Same

Which Drake album had the singles God's Plan, Nice for What, I'm Upset, In My Feelings, and Nonstop?
Scorpion

Who features on the cover of Drake's More Life?
Dennis Graham

Who composed Moses und Aron, an opera in three acts whose third act was unfinished?
Arnold Schoenberg

When did Leonard Bernstein debut with the New York Philharmonic?
14 November 1943

In which two parts of Wagner's Der Ring des Nibelungen does Erda appear?
Das Rheingold, Siegfried

In which two parts of Wagner's Der Ring des Nibelungen does Fricka appear?
Das Rheingold, Die Walküre

In which two parts of Wagner's Der Ring des Nibelungen does Siegfried appear?
Siegfried, Götterdämmerung

Define ``salubrious.''
favourable to or promoting health or well-being

What is Davvisámegiella?
Northern Sámi

How does one say ``Northern Sámi'' in Northern Sámi?
Davvisámegiella

What band plays ``Mr. Tambourine Man''?
the Byrds

Where is the only tropical rainforest in America's national forest system?
Puerto Rico

What was the name of the first mammal in space? He was a monkey.
Albert II

What is eschatology?
the part of theology concerned with death, judgement, and the final destiny of the soul and of humankind

Define ``cavalier'' as an adjective.
showing a lack of proper concern

What word for a ski run of compacted snow comes from the French for ``racetrack''?
piste

What is donatio mortis causa?
gift of personal property made by someone who expects to die in the immediate future, taking full effect only after the donor dies

What name is given to a gift of personal property made by someone who expects to die in the immediate future, taking full effect only after the donor dies?
donatio mortis causa

Who wrote the piano work Cantéyodjayâ?
Olivier Messiaen

What country does B.U.G. Mafia come from?
Romania

Whose remains constitute the type specimen for the species Homo sapiens?
Carolus Linnaeus

What is a conniption?
fit of anger or panic; fit of laughter

Which Antarctic island belonging to Norway is home to Lars Christensen Peak?
Peter I Island

Who was the editor-in-chief of Pravda between the years of 1918 and 1929?
Nikolai Bukharin

What is the highest one-hand score in cribbage?
29

What was the B-side of ``Hey Jude''?
Revolution

For whom did Paul McCartney write ``Hey Jude''?
Julian Lennon

What fraction of a mile is a furlong?
one eighth

How many yards are in a furlong?
220

Where do the European protagonists in Jules Verne's novel César Cascabel encounter 350--400 members of a Finnish tribe who make their living by whaling and sealing?
Kotelny Island

What does ``cromulent'' mean?
acceptable

Define ``scatty.''
absent-minded and disorganized

What is the phenomenon, named after where it was first recorded, wherein an observer see the sun rising earlier or setting later than it is rising or setting?
the Novaya Zemlya effect

Who discovered and named Spitsbergen?
Willem Barentsz

What is the name of the cape at the north of Severny Island?
Cape Zhelaniya

What is the southern island of Novaya Zemlya?
Yuzhny Island

What is the northern island of Novaya Zemlya?
Severny Island 

What strait separates Yuzhny Island and Severny Island and connects the Barents Sea and the Kara Sea?
the Matochkin Strait

What bodies of water does the Matochkin Strait conjoin?
the Barents Sea, the Kara Sea

What cape on Severny Island was the detonation site of Tsar Bomba?
Sukhoy Nos

What Belgian city on the Scheldt is linked to the North Sea by the Westerschelde estuary?
Antwerp

What north-eastern French region whose capital is Strasbourg borders both Germany and Switzerland?
Alsace

What mountain range is the backbone of Italy?
Apennines

What city is Scotland's third most populous and nicknamed ``the Granite City''?
Aberdeen

Of what country was Zog I king from 1928 until 1939?
Albania

What ``impenetrable'' forest region of Belgium and Luxembourg did the Nazis break through in their attack on France in 1940?
Ardennes

Which Spanish city is allegedly named after Hamilcar Barca, father of the Carthaginian General Hannibal?
Barcelona

What capital city of the Emilia-Romagna region in Italy is home to the oldest university in the world?
Bologna

Through what city did Lady Godiva ride while covered by nothing but her hair?
Coventry

On what river is Cork situated?
River Lee

What was the Flavian Amphitheater?
the Colosseum

Which French port on the English Channel was an English possession from 1347 to 1558?
Calais

Which Italian island lends its name to a style of cropped pants?
Capri

What town near Munich was the site of Germany's first Nazi concentration camp?
Dachau

Which Croatian city, located on the Adriatic Sea, was formerly the capital of the Republic of Ragusa?
Dubrovnik

What city, located on the Rhine, is the capital of the German state of North Rhine--Westphalia?
Düsseldorf

What city is divided by the Liffey, Tolka, and Dodder Rivers?
Dublin

What Scottish city is home to Abertay University and was the United Kingdom's first UNESCO City of Design?
Dundee

Which English city is home to Darley Park, Lombe's Mill, and the Royal School for the Deaf?
Derby

What river, the fourth longest in Europe, runs through Russia, Belarus, and Ukraine?
Dnipro

What strait in north-western Turkey connects the Aegean Sea to the Sea of Marmara?
Dardanelles

Which Russian river rises in Novomoskovsk and empties into the Sea of Azov?
Don

What Swedish lake system formed by an impact crater lends its name to the unique type of rock found in the area?
Dellen

What county in north-east England is known for its eponymous cathedral, castle, and university?
Durham

What is la Manche?
the English Channel

What Dutch province contains Eindhoven?
North Brabant

What river passes through Hamburg and Dresden?
the Elbe River

What is the official residence of France's president?
the Élysée Palace

What mountain in Switzerland is known for its difficult-to-climb north face?
Eiger

Which city in the Ruhr area in North Rhine--Westphalia is famous for its links to the Krupp family iron works?
Essen

What historic city is the administrative centre of Devon, England?
Exeter

What area in England is chiefly associated with the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk?
East Anglia

What city in modern-day Turkey borders Greece and Bulgaria and served as the capital of the Ottoman Empire before Constantinople?
Edirne

What capital city of the French department of Isère is the capital of the Alps?
Grenoble

What capital of the federal state of Styria is the second largest city in Austria?
Graz

What city is near the Alhambra?
Granada

Which commune near Milan, Italy gives its name to a type of strong blue-veined cheese?
Gorgonzola

Of what autonomous community of Spain is Santiago de Compostela the capital?
Galicia

Which city in Baden-Württemberg, Germany is famous for its university founded in 1386?
Heidelberg

What is the capital of Lower Saxony?
Hanover

What town on the Weser River in Lower Saxony is associated with the pied piper?
Hamelin

What small German island/archipelago in the German Bight was Danish from 1714 until seized by the British navy in 1807 and later ceded officially to Britain? In 1890, it was returned to Germany.
Helgoland

Who founded the Hermitage?
Catherine the Great

Which Aegean island shares its name with a constellation and a many-headed mythological monster?
Hydra

What province of south-west Spain is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean and the provinces of Badajoz, Seville, and Cádiz?
Huelva

Which city on the Spaarne River is the capital of North Holland?
Haarlem

What name is given to a citadel within a Russian town, most famously in Moscow?
kremlin

What city is the capital and largest city of the Republic of Tatarstan?
Kazan

The area around which Russian city was the site of the largest tank battle in history in 1943?
Kursk

What coal-mining city of southern Poland is the largest city in Upper Silesia?
Katowice

What strait lies between Jutland, Denmark, and southern Sweden?
Kattegat

What Bronze Age city discovered in Crete in 1878 is considered Europe's oldest city?
Knossos

What city in Schleswig-Holstein has a 98-kilometre-long canal connecting it to Brunsbüttel?
Kiel

What English county is the garden of England?
Kent

Which Norwegian town hosted the 1994 Winter Olympic Games?
Lillehammer

Which English city lies on the River Mersey?
Liverpool

Which German city was the scene of the Monday Demonstrations against communist rule in 1989 and 1990?
Leipzig

Which city is the capital of the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region of eastern France?
Lyon

Which is the third largest Greek island, separated from Turkey by the Mitilíni Strait?
Lesbos

Which Alpine mountain is also called ``Cervin'' and ``Cervino'' and stands on the border between Switzerland and Italy?
Matterhorn

What sixth largest city of Spain in Andalusia lies on the Costa del Sol?
Málaga

Which is the largest of the Spanish-owned Balearic Islands?
Majorca

What river in northern France was the site of two eponymous battles during World War I?
Marne

What is the largest city north of the Arctic Circle?
Murmansk

Of what county in East Anglia is Norwich the capital?
Norfolk

What is the capital of Campania?
Naples

What Spanish province's capital is Pamplona?
Navarre

What is the capital of Pays de la Loire?
Nantes

What city in Wales hosted the 2010 Ryder Cup?
Newport

What Dutch city on the Waal River near the German border is considered to be the oldest city in its country?
Nijmegen

What city in England is famous for its links with Robin Hood?
Nottingham

What abandoned Ukrainian city contains Chernobyl?
Pripyat

Which historical province of south-east France borders the Mediterranean Sea and Italy?
Provence

From what city did the Pilgrim Fathers depart in Devon, England on their voyage to the Americas in 1620?
Plymouth

What river passes through Bonn, Cologne, and Arnhem?
Rhine

What large town is the county town of the ceremonial county of Berkshire?
Reading

What is the capital city of Normandy?
Rouen

Which city in the Champagne-Ardenne region of France was the traditional site of the crowning of French monarchs?
Reims

What is the name of the megalopolis comprising the four largest cities in the Netherlands?
Randstad

What is the capital of Andalusia?
Seville

What is Ireland's longest river?
the River Shannon

What is the Britain's longest river?
the River Severn

What is the capital of Alsace?
Strasbourg

What river rises near Dijon in north-east France and flows through Paris and into the English Channel at Le Havre?
the Seine

What city in southern Yorkshire had an international reputation for steel production in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries?
Sheffield

Which is the largest city in Occitanie?
Toulouse

What port in southern France whose name starts with a ``t'' has a significant naval base?
Toulon

What river passes through Nottingham, Newark, and Gainsborough?
the River Trent

What city in central Spain has been famous for its steel and sword-making since Roman times?
Toledo

What was the de facto capital of France during the World War II Nazi occupation?
Vichy

Which Russian city was known as Stalingrad from 1925 to 1961?
Volgograd

Whence did Shakespeare's Two Gentlemen come?
Verona

What city in the autonomous community of Galicia sits close to the Portuguese border?
Vigo

Which city in Hampshire did Alfred the Great make his capital city?
Winchester

What palace in St. Petersburg was the official residence of the Russian monarchs from 1732 to 1917?
the Winter Palace

What is the home of Volkswagen AG?
Wolfsburg

What name is given to the bay surrounded by Lincolnshire, Cambridgeshire, Norfolk, and the North Sea in eastern England?
the Wash

What was Ellef Ringnes's occupation?
brewer

What are the world's ten tallest mountains?
Mount Everest, K2, Kanchenjunga, Lhotse, Makalu, Cho Oyu, Dhaulagiri I, Manaslu, Nanga Parbat, Annapurna I

What is the fourteenth tallest mountain in the world, the last above 8000 metres in height?
Shishapangma

What Scottish city is granite?
Aberdeen

What cowtown in Kansas was the first terminus of the Chisholm Trail?
Abilene

What ancient port on Haifa Bay shares its name with an administrative division of Brazil?
Acre

Where was Davy Crockett killed in 1836?
the Alamo

What is the largest city on the Bay of Gibraltar?
Algeciras

Where is the Golden Temple?
Amritsar

What is the capital of Aquitaine?
Bordeaux

On the delta of what river is Astrakhan?
Volga

What Spanish city near Portugal was beleaguered by the Duke of Wellington in 1812?
Badajoz

Where was the Charge of the Light Brigade?
Balaclava

What was Botswana's name until 1966?
Bechuanaland

What was the capital of Prussia?
Berlin

What is the capital of Biscay, Spain?
Bilbao

What was the name of the palace in which Sir Winston Churchill was born?
Blenheim Palace

What city is home to the world's oldest university? The school in question was founded in 1088.
Bologna

What Austrian town was Adolf Hitler's birthplace?
Branau am Inn

What state in the north of Germany is surrounded by Lower Saxony?
Bremen

Of what French region is Rennes the capital?
Brittany

What ancient Uzbek city on the Silk Road is one of the oldest trade centers in central Asia and noted for its production of karakul fleeces?
Bukhara

What is the capital of Burgundy?
Dijon

What is the city of a thousand minarets?
Cairo

What city in the French Riviera holds an annual film festival?
Cannes

What is the name of the cape at the southern tip of India?
Cape Comorin

What sea surrounds Capri?
the Tyrrhenian Sea

By what name was China known to medieval Europe?
Cathay

What French province's capital is Troyes?
Champagne

What is the largest estuary in the world?
St. Lawrence Estuary

What is the largest estuary in the United States?
Chesapeake Bay

What river carved the Grand Canyon?
the Colorado River

What is the grand lady of the Ionian Sea?
Corfu

What ancient region in what is now southwestern Croatia that is composed of mountains and a narrow coastal plain along the Adriatic Sea, together with offshore islands, once formed part of the Roman province of Illyricum?
Dalmatia

What is, together with the Murray, the longest river in Australia?
the Darling

In what city in South Dakota was Wild Bill Hickok killed?
Deadwood

What strait lies between Greenland and Iceland?
the Denmark Strait

What was an informal name for the southern states of the United States?
Dixie

Where is Dodge City?
Kansas

What is the Pas de Calais?
the Dover Strait

What South African mountain range is also called ``the Dragon Mountains''?
the Drakensberg

What ``firth'' is to the south of Dundee?
the Firth of Tay

What city in the north of England on the River Wear is famous for its eleventh-century cathedral containing the tomb of the Venerable Bead?
Durham

Off of what English county is the Eddystone Lighthouse located?
Cornwall

What is the smallest of the African Great Lakes?
Lake Edward

Lake Edward is on the border between which two countries?
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda

What river links Lake Albert and Lake Edward?
the Semliki River

What is the English name for Taranaki, the slumbering volcano on New Zealand's North Island?
Mount Egmont

Which Swiss city is the first west of Eiger?
Lauterbrunnen

Which country contains the famed El Alamein?
Egypt

Which Texan city on the Rio Grande was called ``the Six Shooter Capital''?
El Paso

Known as Mordvinov Island in Russia, which island in the South Shetlands did Ernest Shackleton and his crew take refuge on after losing the Endurance?
Elephant Island

Which cathedral city in Cambridgeshire was the base of Hereward the Wake?
Ely

What English county contains Epsom Downs?
Surrey

What Roman road connected London to Lincoln and York?
Ermine Street

What are the three transcendentals?
truth, beauty, goodness 

What does the ``d: c'' mean in ``quam olim d: c''?
da capo

Who introduced the words ``otonality'' and ``utonality''?
Harry Partch

What Hungarian conductor and composer completed Schoenberg's Moses und Aron and orchestrated Ravel's Le Tombeau de Couperin?
Kocsis Zoltán

What are the kabupaten of Bali?
Badung, Bangli, Buleleng, Gianyar, Jembrana, Karangasem, Klungkung, Tabanan

What is the second largest city in Bali?
Singaraja

Identify the religious poet of England who wrote ``Easter Wings.''
George Herbert

What is a censer?
container in which incense is burnt during a religious ceremony

No, it's not a unit of type size equal to twelve points; it's this small rabbit relative of the mountains.
pika

No, it's not a cranium; it's this manually-propelled racing boat.
scull

What is the northernmost state of the contiguous United States?
Minnesota

Who pitched a perfect game in the 1956 World Series, winning the World Series with his New York Yankees and taking World Series MVP?
Don Larsen

What is a ewer?
large jug with a wide mouth, formerly used for carrying water

Who wrote ``No man is an island'' and ``Air \& Angels''?
John Donne

Appropriately, ``Champ'' is the name of this lake's version of Nessie, the Loch Ness Monster.
Lake Champlain

What prize is commonly referred to as ``the Nobel of Architecture''?
the Pritzker Prize

What nickname for the Nationale-Nederlanden building in Prague comes from the name of a dancing pair?
Ginger and Fred

In Rousseau's ``Sleeping Gypsy,'' a full moon hangs in the night sky while this animal catches the scent of the title figure.
lion

In 1309 Clement V moved the papacy to what is now this French city, using lack of security in Rome as an excuse.
Avignon

When boiling water, energy absorbed that escapes as vapour is this type of heat, from the Latin for ``to hide.''
latent

Baptiste du Cerceau & Pierre des Illes designed this, the oldest existing bridge across the Seine.
Pont Neuf

Executive clemency can lead to this, reducing the severity of a punishment.
commutation

Where is Dartmouth College?
Hanover

What is a prooemium?
preface or introduction

What word, from the Greek for ``to clog up,'' represents the blending into one syllable of two vowels of adjacent syllables (via crasis, synaeresis, synizesis, or elision)?
synaloepha

What is synaeresis?
the contraction of two vowels into a diphthong or single vowel

What is synizesis?
the contraction of two syllables into one by uniting in pronunciation two adjacent vowels

Name all of the English anagrams of ``plates.''
palest, palets, pastel, petals, plates, pleats, septal, staple, tepals

What is auding?
the process of hearing, recognizing, and interpreting spoken language

Define ``inimitable.''
so good or unusual as to be impossible to copy

What is Charles Dickens's last completed novel?
Our Mutual Friend

What names are given to the stressed and unstressed syllables of a metrical foot?
arsis, thesis

What does ``LCBO'' stand for?
Liquor Control Board of Ontario

Which month of the French Republican calendar ran from 19 June to 18 July?
Messidor

Which was the tenth month of the French Republican calendar?
Messidor

Which month of the French Republican calendar ran from 19 July to 17 August?
Thermidor

Which was the eleventh month of the French Republican calendar?
Thermidor

Which month of the French Republican calendar ran from 18 August to 16 September?
Fructidor

Which was the twelfth month of the French Republican calendar?
Fructidor

Which month of the French Republican calendar ran from 22 September to 21 October?
Vendémiaire

Which was the first month of the French Republican calendar?
Vendémiaire

Which month of the French Republican calendar ran from 22 October to 20 November?
Brumaire

Which was the second month of the French Republican calendar?
Brumaire

Which month of the French Republican calendar ran from 21 November to 20 December?
Frimaire

Which was the third month of the French Republican calendar?
Frimaire

Which month of the French Republican calendar ran from 21 December to 19 January?
Nivôse

Which was the fourth month of the French Republican calendar?
Nivôse

Which month of the French Republican calendar ran from 20 January to 18 February?
Pluviôse

Which was the fifth month of the French Republican calendar?
Pluviôse

Which month of the French Republican calendar ran from 19 February to 20 March?
Ventôse

Which was the sixth month of the French Republican calendar?
Ventôse

What sense is most closely linked to memory?
smell

What animal was paraded through the streets of Paris on Mardi Gras to remind people not to eat meat during Lent?
ox

What animals did the Ricardos and Mertzes attempt to raise for profit upon moving to Connecticut?
chickens

What player squats an average of three hundred times during a double-header?
the catcher

How many rings are there on a five-zone archery target?
four

What mammals travel with yellowfin tuna?
dolphins

Which day of the week did the Romans call ``dies solis''? 
Sunday

What team won the first national college football championship?
Yale

From which American city did Indiana Jones take off on his adventures in Raiders of the Lost Ark?
San Francisco

How many Rocky movies were made by 1990?
five

Who told the American public in 1974 that ``our long national nightmare is over''?
Gerald Ford

Who was the only American president to have earned a PhD?
Woodrow Wilson

Which state boasts the famous Calumet race on horse farms?
Kentucky

What was Rhoda's maiden name?
Morgenstern

What was the nickname of frontierswoman Martha Jane Burk?
Calamity Jane

How many days after John F. Kennedy's assassination was Lee Harvey Oswald shot?
two

How long does it take the moon to revolve around the Earth, to the nearest day?
twenty-seven

How many minor league home runs did Babe Ruth hit?
one

Who was the first American president to hold a televised news conference?
Dwight D. Eisenhower

What Canadian rode Secretariat to the Triple Crown in 1973?
Ron Turcotte

What Dickens character said: ``Please, sir, I want some more''?
Oliver Twist

Whose flag do the Union Jack and the Southern Cross comprise?
Australia's

What is a Maris Piper?
potato

Who sold a cow for five beans?
Jack

Who broke the four-minute mile?
Roger Bannister

What word stands for a warm dry wind that blows down the east side of the Rocky Mountains at the end of winter and a large North Pacific salmon that is an important commercial food fish?
chinook

Where did the mutineers of the Bounty settle?
the Pitcairn Islands

Which is Italy's longest river?
the Po

Which Norwegian politician's name came to mean ``traitor who serves as the puppet of the enemy occupying his country''?
Vidkun Quisling

What is a jumbuck?
sheep

Who was the King of Swing?
Benny Goodman

Who was the first to fly across the channel?
Louis Blériot

In which war was the Charge of the Light Brigade?
the Crimean War

What sport has the mashie niblick?
golf

What is the arvo in Australia?
the afternoon

Identify the American Civil War general noted for the following last words: ``They couldn't hit an elephant at this distance.''
John Sedgwick

Whence are mongongo nuts collected?
elephant dung

What was Buzz Aldrin's mother's maiden name?
Moon

What was Buzz Aldrin's first name?
Edward

What were the first words spoken on the moon?
contact light

Who was the British Surveyor General of India before Sir Andrew Waugh?
Sir George Everest

Who was the first to put two feet on Mount Everest?
Sir Andrew Waugh

Which two Catholics did George Bernard Shaw name collectively ``Chesterbelloc''?
G. K. Chesterton, Hilaire Belloc

What are the four types of shipwreck?
flotsam, jetsam, lagan, derelict

What bird of the genus Menura is noted for its ability to replicate sounds?
lyrebird

What island group is Deception Island part of?
the South Shetland Islands

What island is separated from the south-east of Baffin Island by the Lower Savage Islands and sees Edgell Island to its north?
Resolution Island

What is Canada's second largest island?
Victoria Island

What is another common name for the Banking Act of 1933, a statute that established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation?
the Glass--Steagall Act

``We have a pope!'' Now in Latin!
Habemus papam!

What is nimbyism?
the behaviour of someone who does not want something to be built or done near where they live, although it does need to be built or done somewhere

What does ``HUAC'' abbreviate?
House Un-American Activities Committee

What is the drink of choice in Nineteen Eighty-Four?
gin

Where is Tok Pisin spoken?
Papua New Guinea

Which Easter cantata, BWV 4, did John Eliot Gardiner describe as Bach's ``first-known attempt at painting narrative in music''?
Christ lag in Todes Banden

Who wrote the hymn ``Befiehl du deine Wege,'' used as a chorale in Bach's St. Matthew Passion?
Paul Gerhardt

What bird is depicted in many Italian Renaissance paintings of the Madonna and Child?
the goldfinch

What does ``op. cit.'' abbreviate?
opere citato

What does ``opere citato'' mean?
in the cited work

Who were Job's three friends named in Job 2?
Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, Zophar the Naamathite

Whose profile is on the Purple Heart?
George Washington's

What actor starred with Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn in Guess Who's Coming to Dinner?
Sidney Poitier

What does ``W. C.'' stand for in ``W. C. Fields''?
William Claude

What does ``WC'' abbreviate in Britain?
water closet

In Greek, according to Matthew, what did Jesus say on the cross around the ninth hour?
Ἠλί, Ἠλί, λεμὰ σαβαχθανί;

In Greek, according to Mark, what did Jesus say on the cross at the ninth hour?
Ἐλωΐ, Ἐλωΐ, λαμὰ σαβαχθανί;

In English, according to Matthew and Mark, what did Jesus say on the cross around the ninth hour?
My God, my God, why hast Thou forsaken me?

What does the German adjective ``heimlich'' mean?
secret

Who won second place in the 1959 Candidates Tournament?
Paul Keres

Who won the 2024 Candidates Tournament?
Dommaraju Gukesh

This, whose name is Latin for ``by his own impulse,'' not to be confused with a sua sponte, is a document issued by the Pope on his initiative directed to the Roman Catholic Church. Examples include the Tra le sollecitudini of Pope Pius X and the Le più colte of Pope Pius VII.
motu proprio

What is the choir that sings at St. Peter's Basilica?
the Cappella Giulia

What pope wrote the motu proprio Tra le sollecitudini in 1903?
Pius X

What is an obbligato?
instrumental part, typically distinctive in effect, which is integral to a piece of music and should not be omitted in performance

Which king of France was the Desired?
Louis XVIII

Define ``environ.''
surround; enclose

Define ``conspecific.''
of the same species

What is iftar?
the meal eaten after sunset during Ramadan

What is the shortest word in the English language containing the first six letters of the alphabet?
feedback

What is the United States' largest national forest?
the Tongass National Forest

Which ``people of the tides'' are found in Southeast Alaska?
the Tlingit

Who was the Cartwright family's cook in Bonanza?
Hop Sing

Who played Duke Mantee in The Petrified Forest (1936)?
Humphrey Bogart

No, it's not a word for domestic fowl. It's a word describing a very small quantity.
paltry

Which ``rebellion'' amid the rule of the Qing Dynasty was led by a Hakka who claimed to be the brother of Jesus Christ?
the Taiping Rebellion

Which dynasty succeeded the Ming?
the Qing

What does ``teleological'' mean?
relating to or involving the explanation of phenomena in terms of the purpose they serve rather than of the cause by which they arise

Who in Shakespeare's Henry VI, Part One has been sent ``to be the English scourge'' (Pt. 1, I.ii.129)?
Joan of Arc

What word represents a fine smooth yarn spun from combed long-staple wool and is the past tense of a verb meaning ``defeat''?
worsted

With a capital s, it is a feminine name, and with a lowercase s, it is a sudden charge out of a besieged place against the enemy. What is the word?
sally

What is attainder?
the forfeiture of land and civil rights suffered as a consequence of a sentence of death for treason or felony

Complete the quotation of Warwick from the first part of William Shakespeare's Henry VI that begins, ``Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch'' (2.4.11--18).
Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch, / Between two dogs, which hath the deeper mouth, / Between two blades, which bears the better temper, / Between two horses, which doth bear him best, / Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye, / I have perhaps some shallow spirit of judgement; / But in these nice sharp quillets of the law, / Good faith, I am no wiser than a daw.

What is the Lumpenproletariat?
the unorganized and unpolitical lower orders of society who are not interested in revolutionary advancement

What is a rabblement?
crowd of common people

Which century saw the First Battle of St. Albans?
the fifteenth century

What does ``spes non confundit'' mean?
hope does not disappoint

There are none so blind as whom?
those who will not see

What is a Smithbilt?
hat

``The Catholic Church is an institution I am bound to hold divine --- but for unbelievers a proof of its divinity might be found in the fact that no merely human institution conducted with such knavish imbecility would have lasted a fortnight.'' Who said this?
Hilaire Belloc

What do you call a creek in Pennsylvania?
kill

Where did Gord Downie see the constellations reveal themselves one star at a time?
Bobcaygeon

Define ``subterfuge.''
deceit used to achieve one's goal

Define ``inscrutable.''
impossible to understand or to interpret

What is Allumwandlung?
chess problem theme in which the four possible types of promotion --- to queen, rook, bishop, and knight --- all take place during the solution

Which music group made ``In The Navy,'' ``Macho Man,'' and ``Y.M.C.A.''?
Village People

What word may one define as ``the female of a horse'' or ``a large, level basalt plain on the surface of the moon, appearing dark by contrast with highland areas''?
mare

What proper noun is at the same time the name of a Pueblo people, the name of the Greek goddesses of death, and the last name of a famed Estonian chess player?
Keres

Which is the first non-trivial knot?
the trefoil knot

Who according to legend cut the Gordian knot?
Alexander the Great

What is a damnum?
loss

What is a damnum fatale?
loss happening from a cause beyond human control

Was 1900 a leap year?
no

Was 2000 a leap year?
yes

Who was the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party from 1921 to 1928?
Chen Duxiu

Who was the Chairman of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party from 1943 to 1976?
Mao Zedong

Who was the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party from 1989 to 2002?
Jiang Zemin

What are the four subregions of Oceania?
Australasia, Melanesia, Micronesia, Polynesia

(1807--82) What Italian patriot and military leader of the Risorgimento, with his volunteer force of Red Shirts, captured Sicily and southern Italy from the Bourbons in 1860 and 1861, thereby playing a key role in the establishment of a united kingdom of Italy?
Giuseppe Garibaldi

(1687--1744) What Italian violin-maker known as ``del Gesù'' is the most famous of a family of three generations of violin-makers based in Cremona?
Giuseppe Guarneri

Whose only novel --- Il Gattopardo (The Leopard) --- was originally rejected by publishers but won worldwide acclaim on its posthumous publication in 1958?
Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa

What is Gjetost?
very sweet, firm golden-brown Norwegian cheese, traditionally made with goat's milk

What is a young horse called?
foal



