12101

What is the area of grammar dealing with endings?
accidence

What is the usual case of a direct object?
accusative

What verb form is used most commonly when the subject of the sentence performs the action or has his state described?
active

What is the noun, pronoun, or clause to which a relative pronoun refers back?
antecedent

What tense of a verb refers to something that happened in the past? An example is ``ἐποίησα'' in ``τοῦτο ἐποίησα.''
aorist

What is the main clause of a conditional sentence?
apodosis

What is the placing of a word, phrase, or clause in parallel with another word, phrase, or clause to give further information about the latter?
apposition

What is the term referring to the distinction between two ways in which a verb can convey time (the time and the type of time)?
aspect

What is something added at the beginning of verbs to denote a past tense?
augment

What is a clause usually beginning in English with the word ``although'' or ``though''?
concessive clause

What is a clause usually beginning in English with the words ``if,'' ``if not,'' or ``unless''?
conditional clause

What is a word used to join clauses, phrases, or words together?
conjunction

What case of an indirect object may mean ``to,'' ``for,'' ``with,'' and ``by''?
dative

What are the Greek definite articles?
ὁ, ἡ, τό

What adjective describes words or expressions that ``point'' to some feature of a situation?
deictic

What is a deponent verb?
passive in form but active in function

What are the two dots placed over the second of two adjacent vowels that are to be pronounced separately, as in ``βοΐ ''?
diaeresis

What is a word formed from another to express diminished size, as with ``hillock''?
diminutive

What is the union of two vowels pronounced as one syllable (one vowel followed by a glide into a second vowel)?
diphthong

What is a short word that cannot stand alone but has to follow another word onto which it throws back its accent?
enclitic

What is the tens of a verb that refers to something in the future at a stage after it has happened, as in ``I shall have ceased''?
future perfect

What is the case that shows possession and means ``of'' dominantly?
genitive

What verbal adjective expresses the idea of obligation?
gerundive

What are the parts of the verb that express a command?
imperative

What tense expresses continuous, repeated, or incomplete action in the past?
imperfect

What is a verb introduced in English by the word ``it''?
impersonal

Of what is the adding of the English word ``ever'' to the end of another word an example?
indefinite construction

Define ``jussive.''
giving an order

What is a verb that does not take a direct object?
intransitive

What is the case that tells us where something is happening?
locative

What is a line above a vowel indicating that it is long?
macron

What is the case of the subject of a sentence or usually of the complement of a verb?
nominative

What Greek mood of the verb does not express statements but such concepts as ``would,'' ``might,'' and ``if only!''? It is also used in the indefinite construction and in certain subordinate clauses. It is more remote than the subjunctive in either likelihood or time.
optative

What verb means ``to give a full grammatical description of a word'' --- that is, ``to give the person, number, tense, mood, voice, and meaning''?
parse

What is an adjective formed from a verb?
participle

What is the tense of a verb that refers to a completed action, the effects of which still continue into the present?
perfect

What is the tense that means ``had,'' referring to a past state resulting from a completed action?
pluperfect

What is a word that stands instead of a noun?
pronoun

What is the ``if ...'' or ``unless ...'' clause of a conditional sentence?
protasis

What is the process by which verbs beginning with a single consonant (not ῥ) form a prefix in the perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect by adding that letter followed by an ε at the beginning?
reduplication

What is a pronoun that introduces a subordinate clause, identifying the person or thing mentioned in the main clause?
relative pronoun

What is the principle according to which the use of a certain tense in the main clause determines whether the subjunctive or the optative should be used in a subordinate clause?
sequence of tenses and moods

What is the part of a noun, adjective, or verb to which endings are added?
stem

What is, in a clause or sentence, the noun or pronoun that causes the action of the verb or has his state described?
subject

What verb form is used, among many other functions, to express doubt, unlikelihood, or possibility? It is less remote than the optative in either likelihood or time. Words such as ``may,'' ``might,'' and ``should'' can indicate it in English.
subjunctive

What is a clause that depends on another clause (usually the main clause) of the sentence in which it stands?
subordinate clause

What is the form of an adjective or adverb that makes it mean ``most'' or ``very''?
superlative

What is a verb used with a direct object either expressed or understood?
transitive

What is the case by which one addresses or calls to someone?
vocative

Who were the three great Attic poets of tragedy in the fifth century BC?
Aeschylus, Euripides, Sophocles

What case indicates separation, or moving away from something?
ablative case

What system of vowel alternation in Proto-Indo-European involves vowels that are used in various parts of a word changing depending on meaning? In the Germanic languages, it forms the basis of the strong verbs.
ablaut

What case is used to indicate the patient or experiencer of a verb's action?
absolutive case

What name is given to a verb of motion whose motion is multidirectional (as opposed to unidirectional) or indirect, or whose action is repeated or iterative, in the Slavic languages?
abstract verb

What does ``AD'' abbreviate?
Anno Domini

Of what is alus mider an example in the Balinese language?
speech register

Of what is andap an example in the Balinese language?
speech register

What is the third-to-last syllable of a word?
antepenultima

What is the removal of a letter or sound from the beginning of a word?
apheresis

What is the removal of an initial unstressed sound from a word? It is the process by which ``escarp'' became ``scarp.''
aphesis

What is the omission of the final sound or syllable of a word without changing its morphological structure or meaning?
apocope

What is a consonant sound produced by restricting the air flow through the mouth only slightly, resulting in a smooth sound?
approximant

What property of a verb form indicates the nature of an action as perfective (complete) or imperfective (incomplete or continuing)?
aspect

What is the aspect of a verb that denotes an action without a definite endpoint or a goal that is tended towards, or rather an action with cumulative reference (such that the expression for that action may describe two or more actions of that kind that, when combined, still constitute a form of that action)?
atelic

What is an adjective that stands in a syntactic position where it directly modifies a noun, as opposed to a predicate adjective?
attributive

What name is given to a term formed by removing an apparent or real prefix or suffix from an older term? For example, the noun ``pea'' arose because the final /z/ sound in ``pease'' sounded like a plural suffix.
back-formation

Define ``barytone.''
with the stress elsewhere than upon the final syllable

What does ``BC'' abbreviate?
Before Christ

What name is given to a borrowing by word-for-word translation? For example, the English expression ``it goes without saying'' is a literal, word-for-word translation of the French ``ça va sans dire,'' and ``flea market'' is a word-for-word translation of the French ``marché aux puces.''
calque

What is a verb able to be immediately followed by the full or bare infinitive, or gerund?
catenative verb

What is the shortening of a word without changing meaning or part of speech?
clipping

Define ``cognate'' in the context of linguistics.
descended from the same source lexeme of an ancestor language

What is a verb of motion whose motion is unidirectional and expresses a single, completed action in the Slavic languages?
concrete verb

What is the mood of a verb used to signify that something is contingent upon the outcome of something else?
conditional mood

What form of consonant mutation found in certain, particularly Uralic, languages, is historically conditioned by the openness of the following syllable?
consonant gradation

What is a term with two opposite meanings called?
contranym

What is a contranym?
term with two opposite meanings

What is a verb that links and equates its subject with its object? It is also called a ``linking verb.''
copula

What adjective means ``derived from a noun''?
denominal

What verb form indicates a wish?
desiderative

What diacritic ( ¨ ) is placed over a vowel letter to indicate that it is sounded separately?
diaeresis

What is the phonological process whereby one of a pair of similar sounds within a word or phrase becomes dissimilar?
dissimilation

What name is given to one of two (or more) words in a language that have the same etymological root (as in etymon, not root morphemes like Proto-Indo-European roots) but have come to the modern language through different routes?
doublet

What name is given to a term carrying negative connotations or imagery to replace a (more) neutral original?
dysphemism

What stage of gradation in Semitic languages can be used both for a superlative and comparative?
elative

What case expresses ``moving out of''?
elative

What is the removal of a phoneme or sequence of phonemes from a word, particularly at the beginning or end?
elision

What is the phonetic joining of a word with the preceding word?
enclisis

In what nominal compound does one part modify the other, where the modified compound refers to the intended meaning of the compound as a whole?
endocentric

What is the insertion of a phoneme, letter, or syllable into a word, usually to satisfy the phonological constraints of a language or poetic context?
epenthesis

Define ``epicene.''
having a single form for both male and female referents

What case used in some languages marks the subject of a transitive verb, but not the subject of an intransitive verb?
ergative case

What verb can be transitive or intransitive, where the intransitive subject is the patient, the same role as the transitive object?
ergative 

What is an etymon?
the source word of a given word

What is, in languages with matres lectionis (consonant letters representing vowels), a form including one or more additional ones?
excessive spelling

What is a sound in a word without etymological reason, added for articulatory purposes?
excrescent

What is a name for a place, people or language used by foreigners instead of the native-language version?
exonym

What is a deliberate misspelling used in writing to indicate that the speech of a character is vernacular, non-standard, or uneducated?
eye dialect

What name is given to the possessive or genitive construction in Persian?
ezafe

What kind of transitive verb is derived from an adjective or noun and expresses the act of making someone/something have the properties (or have more of the properties) of the base adjective or noun?
factitive

What is a word in a language that bears a phonetic resemblance to a word in another language, often because of a common etymology, but has a different meaning?
false friend

What consonant sound is produced by air flowing through a constriction in the mouth, typically producing a sibilant, hissing, buzzing or otherwise ``rough'' quality?
fricative

What is the phenomenon wherein a consonant is pronounced for an audibly longer period of time than is done normally?
gemination

What verbal aspect specifies an action as occurring habitually? It is often called ``habitual.''
consuetudinal

What is a word that occurs only once within a given corpus, either in the written record of an entire language, in the works of an author, or in a single text? An example is ``νεκραγωγοῦντα.'' 
hapax legomenon

What is the elision or deletion of a part of a word (a sequence of phonemes, or a series of letters) that is repeated (either exactly or with slight change)?
haplology

Define ``hypercorrect.''
incorrect because of the misapplication of a standard rule

In what form of metathesis are non-contiguous sounds switched?
hyperthesis

What is the Arabic possessive or genitive construction called?
ʾiḍāfa

What is a word that evokes an idea in sound, often a vivid impression of certain sensations or sensory perceptions, e.g. sound, movement, colour, shape, or action?
ideophone

What is a word with one or more inflections with more syllables than the lemma form?
imparisyllabic

What mood of a verb expresses an order or command?
imperative

What is a verb that cannot take a subject or takes a third-person neuter subject pronoun (e.g. ``it'') without an antecedent?
impersonal verb

What case is used to express means or agency? Generally, it is indicated in English by ``by'' or ``with'' with the objective.
instrumental

What is an empty morph (or meaningless morph) inserted between two morphemes in the process of word formation?
interfix

What specific occurrence of palatalization occurred in the Proto-Slavic language, in which a consonant combined with the palatal approximant /j/ to form a palatalized consonant?
iotation

What number of inflectional endings sometimes called ``desinetial inflections,'' applied to Arabic nouns, adjectives, and verbs, do not appear in writing --- with minor exceptions --- and are not pronounced in pausa, i.e. at the end of a sentence or before a pause?
ʾiʿrāb

What mood of a verb is used to indicate a command, permission, or agreement with a request?
jussive

What was the classically based artificial (standardized) Greek language created at the start of Greece's independence from the Ottoman Empire? It was used for all formal and official purposes until 1976.
Katharevousa

What metaphorical compound or phrase describes basic objects in an allusive fashion, especially in Germanic poetry?
kenning

What type of Wanderwort is specific to a particular culture or is spread by an influential cross-cultural phenomenon?
Kulturwort

What rhetorical figure involving understatement consists of saying that something has less of one thing to mean more of the opposite?
litotes

What case is used to indicate place or the place where or wherein?
locative

What short, straight, horizontal diacritical mark ( ¯ ) is placed over any of various letters, usually to indicate that the pronunciation of a vowel is long?
macron

What grammatical voice subsumes the meanings of both the middle voice and the passive voice?
mediopassive

What form of understatement that consists of downplaying or diminishing the focal quality of a statement for contrastive, humorous or dramatic effect, sometimes deployed as part of a higher register? One example is saying ``he is somewhat displeased'' instead of ``he is furious.''
meiosis

What name is given to the infix -né- or -n- in Proto-Indo-European --- one of the affixes marking the imperfective aspect?
nasal infix

What is a nonce word?
word invented for the occasion

In Slavic languages, what is a plural gender used for all groups that do not contain men, as well as plurals of masculine animate, masculine inanimate, feminine, and neuter nouns?
nonvirile

What name is given to any case that is neither nominative nor vocative?
oblique/objective

What category of verb form (a mood) expresses wishes along with other meanings?
optative mood

Define ``oxytone.''
with the stress upon the final syllable

What adjective describes a word with the stress upon the final syllable?
oxytone

What is the addition of sounds at the end of a word without changing its morphological structure or meaning?
paragoge

What is a word whose inflections contain the same number of syllables as the lemma form?
parisyllabic

What adjective describes a word with the stress upon the penultimate syllable?
paroxytone

What is the next-to-last syllable of a word?
penultima

What adjective describes using more words to produce a grammatical effect?
periphrastic

What is a consonant sound produced by completely blocking the airflow through the mouth for a short time?
plosive

What verb form of perfect aspect and past tense is used to describe an action or event which is regarded as having been completed in the past, in relation to a time already in the past?
pluperfect

What does ``plurale tantum'' mean?
plural only

What tense shows an action at a determined moment in the past?
preterite

What adjective describes a word with the stress upon the antepenultimate syllable? 
proparoxytone

What name is given to a descendant word in a daughter language, descended from an earlier language?
reflex

What verbal aspect, a subclass of perfective, denotes a momentary or punctual event (e.g. to sneeze, to blink, to knock)?
semelfactive

What is a letter or other symbol that stands for a word or name? For example, ``ꝓ'' is one in medieval Latin for the word ``pro.''
siglum

What does ``s.l.'' abbreviate?
sine locō

In what specific occurrence of palatalization that occurred in the Proto-Slavic language did the velar consonants *k *g *x when followed by any of the front vowels *e *ě *ь *i become the sounds *č *ž *š respectively?
Slavic first palatalization

What does ``s.n.'' abbreviate?
sine nōmine

What type of cliché uses an old idiom formulaically in a new context?
snowclone

What mood of a verb expresses an action or state which is hypothetical or anticipated rather than actual, including wishes and commands?
subjunctive

What is the deletion or elision of sounds inside a word (not at the beginning or end), most often a single vowel, but sometimes a consonant or a sequence of vowels or consonants?
syncope

What is the situation in which two or more inflected forms of a word are identical?
syncretism

What is the aspect of a verb that denotes an action with a definite endpoint or a goal that is tended towards, or rather an action that is quantized (such that the expression for that action may not describe both the action and a smaller part of that same action)?
telic

What is the insertion of one or more words between the components of a compound word?
tmesis

What verb form in some Balto-Slavic languages expresses a coincidentally proceeding or following action?
transgressive

What is a consonant made with the tongue touching the soft palate?
velar

What is another term for the soft palate?
velum

In what type of backslang used in French does the order of the syllables or sounds of words change, usually with the last syllable coming first?
verlan

In Slavic languages, what plural gender is used for groups that include men and for masculine personal nouns?
virile

What is a word form that has spread over a substantial area, or to many regions, outside of that of its language of origin, typically due to cultural exchange resulting from travel and trade?
Wanderwort

In Proto-Indo-European linguistics, what name is given to an ablaut form of a root characterized by the absence of the basic ablauting vowel phonemes */e/ and */o/?
zero-grade

What name is given to an initial ⟨h⟩ that is treated as a consonant?
aspirated h

What name is given to an initial ⟨h⟩ that is treated as a vowel?
mute h

What does ``overmorrow'' mean?
the day after tomorrow

What collective name is given to significant changes to the pronunciation of English that happened between the 15th and 18th centuries?
Great Vowel Shift

What does the samurai never blame?
his sword

What things never lie, according to Tony Montana, Chico?
the eyes

In Monty Python and the Holy Grail, what knights halt King Arthur and his companions in a forest?
the knights who say ``ni!''

What is the English name for the João-de-Barro, which also may be called the ``red ovenbird''?
rufous hornero

Like what do real Gs move in silence?
lasagna

Finish the colloquialism: ``I ran away faster than you could say ---.'' (No, the saying is not about the famous number 42 Jackie.)
Jack Robinson

(Before and after.) Norwegian mathematician who discovered New Zealand.
Niels Henrik Abel Tasman

Where did Atle Selberg work for most of his academic life?
Institute for Advanced Study

Identify the author. ``Only the silent, sleepy, staring houses in the backwoods can tell all that has lain hidden since the early days; and they are not communicative, being loath to shake off the drowsiness which helps them forget. Sometimes one feels that it would be merciful to tear down these houses, for they must often dream.''
H. P. Lovecraft

What is demagoguery?
political activity or practices that seek support by appealing to the desires and prejudices of ordinary people rather than by using rational argument

What is Emanuel Ax's occupation?
piano playing

What is the nearest integer to the Golomb--Dickman constant?
1

What Spanish philosopher studied at Harvard under William James and Josiah Royce?
George Santayana

What theorem whose name contains two names, though having different formulations, encapsulates the idea that projective modules over commutative rings are ``the same'' as vector bundles on compact topological spaces?
Serre--Swan theorem

What duo composed the music for the Halo video games?
Martin O'Donnell, Michael Salvatori

What was Mike Cammalleri's hometown?
Richmond Hill

What NHL team drafter Mike Cammalleri in 2001?
Los Angeles Kings

What team was Mike Cammalleri on when he scored a career-high 82 points in the 2008--09 season?
Calgary Flames

What is a proparoxytone?
word with stress on the antepenultima

What is a properispomenon?
word with a circumflex on the penultima

What is a paroxytone?
word with stress on the penultima

What is a perispomenon?
word with a circumflex on the ultima

What is an oxytone?
word with stress on the ultima

What is a barytone?
word without stress on the ultima

What transposition in Ancient Greek involves a long-short vowel length combination becoming short-long?
quantitative metathesis

What is a fanook?
homosexual

Where is Zakopane?
Poland

What mountain range can one see from Zakopane, Poland?
Tatras

What word was controversially added to the Nicene Creed?
Filioque

Who constructed the theatre at Epidaurus?
Polykleitos the Younger

With what drink are the names Lafite and Rothschild associated?
wine

What is coriander's name in the United States?
cilantro

What is cilantro's name outside of the United States?
coriander

By what nickname are residents of  Bures-sur-Yvette known?
Buressois

In what industry did Ingmar Bergman work?
film

What name does a twelve go by in the game of craps?
boxcars

How old was Methuselah when he died?
969

What country houses the city of Hargeisa?
Somalia

Whose embedding theorem says that, for any small abelian category $A$, there is a ring $R$ and a full, faithful, and exact functor from $A$ to the category of $R$-modules?
Barry Mitchell

What two countries are home to the White Carpathians?
Czech Republic, Slovakia

Of what mountain range is Chmeľová part?
White Carpathians

In what country was Stan Mikita born?
Slovakia

Who was the first Slovak-born hockey player to win the Stanley Cup?
Stan Mikita

For what team did Stan Mikita play?
Chicago Blackhawks

Where was Red Kelly born?
Simcoe, Ontario

How many Stanley Cups did Red Kelly win?
eight

For what two teams did Red Kelly play?
Detroit Red Wings, Toronto Maple Leafs

How many Stanley Cups did Red Kelly win while he was a member of Parliament?
two

What number did Red Kelly wear?
4

Where was Terry Sawchuck born?
Winnipeg

How many Stanley Cups did Terry Sawchuck win?
four

What was Terry Sawchuck's position?
goalie

How many shutouts did Terry Sawchuck record?
103

Who was the Stratford Streak?
Howie Morenz

Whose number was the first that the Montreal Canadiens retired?
Howie Morenz

How many Stanley Cups did Howie Morenz win?
three

Who was the Edmonton Express?
Eddie Shore

Where was Eddie Shore born?
Fort Qu'Appelle

What position did Eddie Shore play?
defenceman

How many Hart Trophies did Eddie Shore win?
four

What hockey player who severely injured Ace Bailey shook hands with Bailey at an all-star benefit game for him in 1934?
Eddie Shore

How many Stanley Cups did Eddie Shore win?
two

For what team did Elmer Lach play?
Montreal Canadiens

What players comprised the Punch Line (from left to right)?
Toe Blake, Elmer Lach, Maurice Richard

How many Stanley Cups did Elmer Lach win?
three

What number did Elmer Lach wear?
16

Where was Syl Apps born?
Paris, Ontario

In what sport did Syl Apps win gold at the 1934 British Empire Games? He came sixth in this sport at the 1936 Olympics.
pole vault

Who won the first Calder Memorial Trophy?
Syl Apps

For what team did Syl Apps play?
Toronto Maple Leafs

How many Stanley Cups did Syl Apps win?
three

For what city was Syl Apps an Ontario MPP?
Kingston

Where was Sid Abel born?
Melville, Saskatchewan

What players comprised the Production Line (from left to right)?
Ted Lindsay, Sid Abel, Gordie Howe

What attacking trio was known collectively as ``MSN'' at FC Barcelona?
Leo Messi, Luis Suárez, Neymar

How many Stanley Cups did Sid Abel win?
three

For what two NHL teams did Sid Abel play?
Detroit Red Wings, Chicago Blackhawks

Define ``whittle.''
carve (wood) into an object by repeatedly cutting small slices from it

Who was Mr. Hockey?
Gordie Howe

Who overtook Gordie Howe for most NHL games played in 2021?
Patrick Marleau

How many seasons did Gordie Howe play in the NHL?
26

How many points did Gordie Howe record in his NHL career?
1850

For what team did Gordie Howe play for 25 seasons?
Detroit Red Wings

How many Stanley Cups did Gordie Howe win?
four

Who is Le Gros Bill?
Jean Béliveau

How many Stanley Cups did Jean Béliveau win as a player?
ten

Where was Jean Béliveau born?
Trois-Rivières

Who was the honourary captain of Team Canada's hockey team in the 2010 Winter Olympics?
Jean Béliveau

Where was Father David Bauer born?
Waterloo, Ontario

For what team did Jean Béliveau play?
Montreal Canadiens

To whom does Matt Groening attribute the quote ``Love is a slippery eel that bites like hell''?
Bertrand Russell

To whom does Matt Groening attribute the quote ``Love is like a perky elf dancing a merry little jig and then suddenly he turns on you with a miniature machine gun''?
Søren Kierkegaard

To whom does Matt Groening attribute the quote ``Love is a snowmobile racing across the tundra and then suddenly it flips over, pinning you underneath. At night, the ice weasels come''?
Friedrich Nietzsche

Who proved Serre's epsilon conjecture?
Ken Ribet

Who helped Andrew Wiles notice that there was a gap in the manuscript of his proof of Fermat's last theorem?
Nicholas Katz

Whose paper entitled ``Deforming Galois representations'' included key ideas used in Wiles's proof of Fermat's last theorem?
Barry Mazur

What two Japanese mathematicians are associated with the modularity theorem linking elliptic curves and modular forms?
Yutaka Taniyama, Goro Shimura

When was Yutaka Taniyama born?
12 November 1927

What is Quebec's motto?
Je me souviens

What does ``Je me souviens'' mean in English?
I remember

What is Ontario's motto?
Ut incepit fidelis sic permanet

What does ``Ut incepit fidelis sic permanet'' mean in English?
Loyal she began, loyal she remains

What is Ontario's flower?
white trillium

What is Ontario's tree?
eastern white pine

What is Nova Scotia's motto?
Munit hæc et altera vincit

What does ``Munit hæc et altera vincit'' mean in English?
One defends and the other conquers

What is Nova Scotia's flower?
mayflower

What is Nova Scotia's tree?
red spruce

What is Nova Scotia's bird?
osprey

What is New Brunswick's motto?
Spem reduxit

What does ``Spem reduxit'' mean in English?
Hope restored

What is New Brunswick's flower?
purple violet

What is New Brunswick's tree?
balsam fir

What is New Brunswick's bird?
black-capped chickadee

What is Manitoba's motto?
Gloriosus et liber

What does ``Gloriosus et liber'' mean in English?
Glorious and free

What is Manitoba's flower?
prairie crocus

What is Manitoba's tree?
white spruce

What is Manitoba's bird?
great grey owl

What is British Columbia's motto?
Splendor sine occasu

What does ``Splendor sine occasu'' mean in English?
Splendour without diminishment

What is British Columbia's flower?
Pacific dogwood

What is British Columbia's tree?
western red cedar

What is British Columbia's bird?
steller's jay

What is Prince Edward Island's motto?
Parva sub ingenti

What does ``Parva sub ingenti'' mean in English?
The small protected by the great

What is Prince Edward Island's flower?
pink lady's slipper

What is Prince Edward Island's tree?
red oak

What is Prince Edward Island's bird?
blue jay

What is Saskatchewan's motto?
Multis e gentibus vires

What does ``Multis e gentibus vires'' mean in English?
From many people, strength

What is Saskatchewan's flower?
western red lily

What is Saskatchewan's tree?
paper birch

What is Saskatchewan's bird?
sharp-tailed grouse

What is Alberta's motto?
Fortis et liber

What does ``Fortis et liber'' mean in English?
Strong and free

What is Alberta's flower?
wild rose

What is Alberta's tree?
lodgepole pine

What is Alberta's bird?
great horned owl

What is Newfoundland and Labrador's motto?
Quaerite prime regnum Dei

What does ``Quaerite prime regnum Dei'' mean in English?
Seek ye first the kingdom of God

What is Newfoundland and Labrador's flower?
pitcher plant

What is Newfoundland and Labrador's tree?
black spruce

What is Newfoundland and Labrador's bird?
Atlantic puffin

What continent houses the city of Ceuta?
Africa

What is the northernmost town on the west coast of South Africa?
Alexander Bay

Who is Matlock?
Andy Griffith

How many Stanley Cups did Jacques Plante win?
six

What two goalies shared the Vezina Trophy in 1969?
Jacques Plante, Glenn Hall

How many Vezina Trophies did Jacques Plante?
seven

Who was the first goalie to don a goalie mask?
Jacques Plante

With what NHL team did Phil Esposito win two Stanley Cups?
Boston Bruins

Where was Phil Esposito born?
Sault Ste. Marie

What was the first name of Phil Esposito's brother who was an NHL goalie?
Tony

For what three NHL teams did Phil Esposito play?
Chicago Blackhawks, Boston Bruins, New York Rangers

Who set the record for most shots in an NHL season in 1971?
Phil Esposito

What did the Ted Lindsay Award used to be called?
Lester B. Pearson Award
 
Was Phil Esposito a lefty or a righty?
lefty

With what NHL team did Johnny Bucyk win two Stanley Cups?
Boston Bruins

Where was Bobby Orr born?
Parry Sound

Who was the MVP of the inaugural Canada Cup?
Bobby Orr

Who was the MVP of the 1987 Canada Cup?
Wayne Gretzky

Who was the MVP of the 1981 Canada Cup?
Vladislav Tretiak

Who was the MVP of the 1984 Canada Cup?
John Tonelli

Who was the MVP of the 1991 Canada Cup?
Bill Ranford

Who was the only team to win the Canada Cup that was not Canada?
Soviet Union

When did the Soviet Union win the Canada Cup?
1981

How many Stanley Cups did Bobby Orr win?
two

Whose flying goal won the Stanley Cup for the Boston Bruins in 1970?
Bobby Orr

What Boston Bruin defenseman from Parry Sound scored nine hat tricks?
Bobby Orr

How many Art Ross Trophies did Bobby Orr win?
two

What two hockey players did Boston Bruin scout Wren Blair describe Bobby Orr as a combination of?
Doug Harvey, Eddie Shore

What number did Bobby Orr wear?
4

What was Bobby Orr's junior number?
2

What is David Letterman's birthday?
12 April

Where did Alan Eagleson graduate with a law degree?
University of Toronto

To whom did Alan Eagleson lose in the 1963 federal election in York West? 
Red Kelly

What Progressive Conservative did Red Kelly defeat in the 1963 federal election in York West? 
Alan Eagleson

What lawyer who was central in the Summit Series and the Canada Cup was disbarred and had his Order of Canada disannulled after being found guilty of fraud?
Alan Eagleson

Where was Bobby Clarke born?
Flin Flon, Manitoba

For what team did Bobby Clarke play?
Philadelphia Flyers

How many Stanley Cups did Bobby Clarke win?
two

On what junior team did Bobby Clarke play?
Flin Flon Bombers

Who was the captain of the winning Canadian team of the 1976 Canada Cup?
Bobby Clarke

What Canadian tied up the game between Canada and Czechoslovakia in the 1976 Canada Cup near the end of regulation?
Bill Barber

Who scored the winning goal in the  1976 Canada Cup in overtime?
Darryl Sittler

Who was the Flower?
Guy Lafleur

Where was Guy Lafleur born?
Thurso

How many Stanley Cups did Guy Lafleur win?
five

Who was Le Turbo de Thurso?
Guy Lafleur

How many Stanley Cups did Bryan Trottier win as a player?
six

What was Bryan Trottier's junior team?
Swift Current Broncos

For what two NHL teams did Bryan Trottier play?
New York Islanders, Pittsburgh Penguins

Who was the Great One?
Wayne Gretzky

How many goals did Wayne Gretzky score in his career?
894

How many goals did Wayne Gretzky score in the 1981--82 season?
92

How many assists did Wayne Gretzky score in his career?
1963

Who was the Magnificent One?
Mario Lemieux

For what NHL team did Mario Lemieux play?
Pittsburgh Penguins

How many Stanley Cups did Mario Lemieux win as a player?
two

Where was Mark Messier born?
St. Albert, Alberta

How many Stanley Cups did Mark Messier win?
six

How many Stanley Cups did Mark Messier win with the Edmonton Oilers?
five

In what year did Mark Messier win the Conn Smythe?
1984

Where was Brett Hull born?
Belleville, Ontario

Who was Brett Hull's father?
Bobby Hull

Who was the Golden Jet?
Bobby Hull

How many Stanley Cups did Brett Hull win?
two

With what two teams did Brett Hull win the Stanley Cup?
Dallas Stars, Detroit Red Wings

Who was the lead singer and guitarist for Creedence Clearwater Revival?
John Fogerty

For what baseball team did Bob Uecker broadcast? 
Milwaukee Brewers

What catcher and broadcaster for the Milwaukee Brewers routinely appeared on Johnny Carson?
Bob Uecker

Where was David Letterman born?
Indianapolis

What late-night talk show host hosted the most episodes?
David Letterman

Who was Bromios, the thunderer?
Dionysus

What is the tallest mountain in the White Carpathians?
Veľká Javorina

Who did Weekend Update on Saturday Night Live in 1985?
Dennis Miller

Who did Weekend Update on Saturday Night Live in 1993?
Norm Macdonald

What late-night talk show host hosted The Tonight Show from 1962 to 1992? He is routinely considered the best of late-night TV.   
Johnny Carson

Who directed Chariots of fire?
Hugh Hudson

Who were the first ten Fields Medallists to come from the École normale supérieure?
Laurent Schwartz, René Thom, Jean-Pierre Serre, Alain Connes, Pierre-Louis Lions, Jean-Christophe Yoccoz, Laurent Lafforgue, Wendelin Werner, Ngô Bả Châu, Cédric Villani

Who was the original architect of the Empire State Building?
Frank Lloyd Cock

What school originated in 1530 when Francis I was advised to start the creation of a school that would teach topics to royal scholars, that were not taught at the Sorbonne, originally Greek, Hebrew, and mathematics, and then later, French law, Latin, and medicine?
Collège de France

When was Henry IV assassinated?
14 May 1610

Who set down the first stone for the Collège de France?
Louis XIII

Inscribed in this building's first stone were the words ``En l'an premier du Regne de Louis XIII Roy de France et de Navarre, âgé de neuf ans, et de la Regence de la Royne Marie de Médicis sa mère MDCX.'' Identify the building.
Collège de France

What architect continued the construction of the Collège de France around the Cour d'Honneur in 1773?
Jean Chalgrin

What street is home to Le Lycée Louis-le-Grand? 
Rue St Jacques

What Parisian Lycée remained open during the Revolution?
Lycée Louis-le-Grand

When did the Lycée Louis-le-Grand get that name?
1873

What Lycée did Galois attend?
Lycée Louis-le-Grand

What school was created after the French Revolution on 28 September 1794, by Jacques- Élie Lamblardie, Gaspard Monge, and Lazare Carnot, as all the royal engineering schools had previously been closed? The aim of this new establishment was to replace all those schools, but they were later reopened and it was decided that students would have to attend this school before entering the other ones.
École Polytechnique

Lycée Henri IV.

What school located on the site of the Royal Abbaye of Sainte-Genevieve was created by Clovis, King of Francs in 506?
Lycée Henri IV

What Lycée did Cauchy attend?
Lycée Henri IV

Who was Cauchy's professor at Lycée Henri IV?
Jacques Binet

What suffix is used for naming ACE inhibitors?
pril

Of what are lisinopril and benazepril examples?
ACE inhibitors

What suffix is used for naming alpha blockers?
zosin

Of what are terazosin and doxazosin examples?
alpha blockers

What suffix is used for naming angiotensin receptor blockers?
sartan

What suffix is used for naming benzodiazepines?
zepam

Of what are diazepam and clonazepam examples?
benzodiazepines

What suffix is used for naming beta blockers?
olol

Of what are metoprolol and carvedilol examples?
beta blockers

What suffix is used for naming H2 antagonists?
tidine

Of what are famotidine and ranitidine examples?
H2 antagonists

What suffix is used for naming 5HT3 antagonists?
setron

What suffix is used for naming proton pump inhibitors?
prazole

What suffix is used for naming quinolone antibiotics?
floxacin

What suffix is used for naming thiazolidinediones?
glitazone

What suffix is used for naming biphosphonates?
dronate

What suffix is used for naming monoclonal antibodies?
mab

What suffix is used for naming echinocandins?
fungin

What suffix is used for naming corticosteroids?
asone

What suffix is used for naming protease inhibitors?
navir

What suffix is used for naming leukotriene modifiers?
lukast

What suffix is used for naming HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors?
statin

What suffix is used for naming beta-2 agonists?
terol

What suffix is used for naming phosphodiesterase inhibitors?
afil

What suffix is used for naming tricyclic antidepressants?
ipramine

Translate ``Lex orandi, lex credendi.''
law of prayer, law of belief

What musicians feature on DJ Khaled's ``I'm the one''?
Chance the Rapper, Justin Bieber, Lil Wayne, Quavo

What pope issued Summorum Pontificum?
Benedict XVI

Who asks: ``[C]an anybody who takes a survey of the whole [Modernist] system be surprised that We should define it as the synthesis of all heresies?''
Pius X

What pope issued Pascendi Dominici Gregis?
Pius X

What is the ``synthesis of all heresies''?
Modernism

What is the Polish name for Lviv?
Lwów 

What is the German name for Lviv?
Lemberg

Translate ``sine qua non.''
without which not

Translate: ``J'ai crû en sagesse.''
I grew in wisdom

Translate: ``J'ai cru en la conjecture de Hodge.''
I believed in the Hodge conjecture

Translate: ``le cru et le cuit.''
the raw and the cooked

What does a cobbler do?
mends shoes

What is ``the dunny''?
toilet

Who says, tricking the cyclops, ``Οὖτις ἐμοί γ᾽ ὄνομα: Οὖτιν δέ με κικλήσκουσι / μήτηρ ἠδὲ πατὴρ ἠδ᾽ ἄλλοι πάντες ἑταῖροι''?
Odysseus

What Toronto Raptors broadcaster on TSN is known for exclaiming ``Get that garbage outta here!'' in his Brooklyn accent?
Jack Armstrong

What does ``Þjóðvegur'' mean?
national road

Define ``outturn.''
quantity produced; output

Define ``remuneration.''
money paid for work or a service

Define ``concomitant.''
naturally accompanying or associated

What is a sequela?
condition that is the consequence of a previous disease or injury

Who won the 2023 World Series?
Texas Rangers

Define ``fuliginous.''
sooty; dusky

Who wrote ``Raspberry beret''?
Prince

What American band made the song ``Drive by''?
Train

What does the Ancient Greek ``λεπταλέος'' mean?
fine; delicate

Who wrote The old man and the sea?
Ernest Hemingway

Who in 1547 became Tsar of Russia at 16?
Ivan IV

Wrote The Great Gatsby?
F. Scott Fitzgerald

What does the ``F'' stand for in ``F. Scott Fitzgerald''?
Francis

Who was the name of the youngest daughter of Tsar Nicholas II?
Anastasia

What isotope was the first to be observed exhibiting superfluidity?
helium-4

Who is described in Judges 6.11?
Gideon

What was Miloš Forman's occupation?
director

What is NPY4R?
pancreatic polypeptide receptor 1

What orchestra did Karel Ančerl direct until his death?
Toronto Symphony Orchestra

Define ``risible.''
inclined to laugh